Globalization

a critical introduction



Second Edition

Revised and Updated




GLOBALIZATION



Also by Jan Aart Scholte

ENCYCLOPEDIA OF GLOBALIZATION ( co-editor, forthcoming)
CIVIL SOCIETY AND GLOBAL DEMOCRACY ( forthcoming)

CIVIL SOCIETY AND GLOBAL FINANCE (editor)

CIVIL SOCIETY VOICES AND THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY
FUND

CONTESTING GLOBAL GOVERNANCE: Multilateral Economic
Institutions and Global Social Movements (co-author)
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS OF SOCIAL CHANGE



Globalization


A Critical Introduction


Second Edition

Jan Aart Scholte


palgrave

macmiilan



© Jan Aart Scholte 2000, 2005

All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this
publication may be made without written permission.

No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence permitting limited
copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road,
London WIT 4LP.

Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.

The author has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this work
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

First edition 2000
Second edition 2005

Published by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN

Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS and
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010
Companies and representatives throughout the world

PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave
Macmillan division of St. Martin's Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.
Macmillan® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom
and other countries. Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European
Union and other countries.

ISBN 978-0-333-97702-6 ISBN 978-0-230-21207-7 (eBook)

DOI 10.1007/978-0-230-21207-7

This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully
managed and sustained forest sources.

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress

10 987654321

14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07 06 05



Summary of Contents


List of Boxes xi

Preface to the Second Edition xiii

Preface to the First Edition xvii

Acknowledgements xix

List of Abbreviations xx

Introduction 1

PART I FRAMEWORK OF ANALYSIS

1 Globalization Debates 13

2 Defining Globalization 49

3 Globalization in History 85

4 Explaining Globalization 121

PART II CHANGE AND CONTINUITY

5 Globalization and Production: From Capitalism to

Hypercapitalism 159

6 Globalization and Governance: From Statism to Polycentrism 185

7 Globalization and Identity: From Nationalism to Hybridization 224

8 Globalization and Knowledge: From Rationalism to Reflexivity 256

PART III NORMATIVE AND POLICY ISSUES

9 Globalization and (In)Security 279

10 Globalization and (In)Equality 316

11 Globalization and (Un)Democracy 348

12 (Re)constructing Future Globalizations 382

Conclusion 424

Bibliography 426

Index 477


v



Contents


List of Boxes xi

Preface to the Second Edition xiii

Preface to the First Edition xvii

Acknowledgements xix

List of Abbreviations xx

Introduction 1

Framework of analysis 2

Change and continuity 4

Normative and policy issues 6

PART I FRAMEWORK OF ANALYSIS

1 Globalization Debates 13

Main points of this chapter 13

Where to start? 15

Continuity or change? 22

Liberation or shackles? 29

What to do? 37

Conclusion 47

2 Defining Globalization 49

Main points of this chapter 49

Rise of the g-word 50

Starting premises for definition 52

Redundant concepts of globalization 54

A way forward 59

Qualifications 75

Conclusion 84

3 Globalization in History 85

Main points of this chapter 85

Intimations of globality: to the nineteenth century 87

Incipient globalization: to the mid-twentieth century 91

vii



viii Contents


Contemporary accelerated globalization 101

Conclusion 117

4 Explaining Globalization 121

Main points of this chapter 121

Contending theories 123

An eclectic synthesis 135

Conclusion 152

PART II CHANGE AND CONTINUITY

5 Globalization and Production: From Capitalism to

Hypercapitalism 159

Main points of this chapter 159

Expanded commodification 161

Altered organization 177

Conclusion 183

6 Globalization and Governance: From Statism to Polycentrism 185

Main points of this chapter 185

The obsolescence of statism 188

The reconstructed state 192

Multi-scalar public governance 202

Privatized governance 214

(Global) civil society 218

Conclusion 221

7 Globalization and Identity: From Nationalism to

Hybridization 224

Main points of this chapter 224

Globalization and the nationality principle 227

Plural national identities 231

Nonterritorial identities 239

Hybridization 252

Conclusion 254

8 Globalization and Knowledge: From Rationalism to

Reflexivity 256

Main points of this chapter 256

Epistemology 258

Ontology 267



Contents ix


Methodology 269

Aesthetics 273

Conclusion 274

PART III NORMATIVE AND POLICY ISSUES

9 Globalization and (In)Security 279

Main points of this chapter 279

Peace 281

Crime 284

Ecological integrity 285

Health 288

Poverty 289

Financial stability 294

Employment 296

Working conditions 300

Identity 304

Knowledge 306

Social cohesion 308

Conclusion 311

10 Globalization and (In)Equality 316

Main points of this chapter 316

Class inequalities 320

Country inequalities 325

Gender inequalities 334

Other inequalities 340

Conclusion 344

11 Globalization and (Un)Democracy 348

Main points of this chapter 348

The limits of statist liberal democracy 351

Citizen ignorance 355

Institutional process failures 361

Structural inequalities 371

Conclusion 380

12 (Re)constructing Future Globalizations 382

Main points of this chapter 382

General policy strategy 383

Enhancing human security 396



x Contents


Enhancing social equality

404

Enhancing democracy

410

Towards implementation

417

Conclusion

421

Conclusion

424

Bibliography

426

Index

477



List of Boxes


Core theses on globalization 8

Globalization debates in summary 47

Manifestations of globality in summary 74

Summary chronology of incipient globalization, 1850s-1950s 100

Summary indicators of accelerated globalization in contemporary

history 117

Contending social explanations of globalization 135

Principal dynamics of globalization 153

Implications of globalization for production in summary 184

Implications of globalization for governance in summary 222

Implications of globalization for identity in summary 254

Implications of globalization for knowledge in summary 274

Globalization and (in)security in summary 312

Globalization and (in)equality in summary 345

Globalization and (un)democracy in summary 380

Towards more humane globalization 422


xi



Preface to the Second Edition


Books on globalization date quickly in the early twenty-first century. It is only
five years since the publication of the first edition, but rapid developments in
the practice and research of globalization, as well as in my own thoughts and
experiences of globality, have already necessitated a large-scale revision.

In terms of concrete actions and trends, the first edition was completed
only a few months after the anti-WTO protests in Seattle and before the
subsequent upsurge of high-profile resistance against prevailing policy
approaches to globalization. It was written before the striking militarization
of globalization fuelled by the attacks of 9/11, wars in Afghanistan and Iraq,
heightened disputes over nuclear proliferation, and intensified state surveil¬
lance of citizens. Moreover, it predated the Bush Administration’s retreat
from multilateralism, the introduction of the euro, and the WTO impasse at
Cancun. The intervening years have in addition brought further so-called
‘Post-Washington Consensus’ reforms of policies towards economic global¬
ization. Hence the book has required considerable updating to catch up with
current events.

Of course it is easy to overestimate the significance of the short-term beat
of history. The immediacy of recent occurrences, crammed into our
consciousness by 24/7 media saturation, can easily distract us from deeper,
more pervasive, and more persistent features of social relations.
Globalization is largely a matter of what the historian Fernand Braudel called
the longue duree, the extended time frame of generations and centuries where
the principal features and forces of societal development tend to reside
(Braudel, 1958). Hence, although events of five years may put some aspects
of globalization into sharper relief or a different light, it is unlikely that core
attributes of the process would change in such a short period. Surface appear¬
ances of globality like the SARS health scare of 2003 come and go; the deeper
trend of growing transplanetary social connectedness persists.

Globalization still matters very much in 2005. Yes, certain calculations of
a few types of global movements have of late shown a year-on-year decelera¬
tion. For example, foreign exchange turnover declined between 1998 and
2001 owing to developments such as the introduction of the euro, although
these transactions had increased substantially again by 2004. The rate of
foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows slowed for three years in 2001-3,
although FDI too has since rebounded. In fact, almost all empirical indicators
of globality have persisted and often risen further in significance since 2000.
Daily life continues to be increasingly suffused with issues of global health,



xiv Preface to the Second Edition


global ecology, global travel, global communications, global military activi¬
ties, global production processes, global markets, global meanings, global
regulations, and global social movements. In the light of this continued signif¬
icance it is hardly surprising that the number of references to ‘globalization’
in the Library of Congress catalogue has multiplied more than sevenfold in
the five years since the first edition (LoC, 1999, 2005).

Thus several recent proclamations of a purported end of globalization are
unsustainable (Gray, 2001; James, 2001; Rugman, 2001; Ralston Saul,
2004; Rosenberg, 2005). To be sure, many exuberant claims of an earlier
generation of writings (including some by the present author) about the
scale, scope, intensity and impact of globalization need to be qualified or
abandoned. For example, the growth of transplanetary connections between
people is clearly not prompting the end of geography, the demise of the state,
the disappearance of the nation, or the dissolution of modernity. However,
a scaling down of previous exaggerations about globality should not be
confused with a decline in actual globality. Obituaries for globalization are
highly premature.

Indeed, the better literature on globalization has become progressively
more sophisticated over the 20 years since the concept entered academic
circulation. Such writings offer tighter conceptualization, more evidence, and
greater nuance. Nevertheless, significant challenges remain for future
research on globalization. For one thing, global (as distinct from interna¬
tional) data continue to be in short supply. Most statistics are still calculated
in relation to state-country units. In addition, little tightly consolidated and
systematically elaborated theorization of globalization is available. The liter¬
ature to date has been much richer in description and prescription than in
explanation. Meanwhile, interdisciplinarity generally remains more aspira¬
tion than actuality in globalization studies. Many scholars have proclaimed
the necessity of transcending narrow disciplinary divisions in order more
fully to understand globalization, but few studies have successfully done
so. Likewise, the widely recognized need for more intercultural approaches
to the subject has gone largely unanswered. Most writings remain heavily
west-centric - and many are more narrowly Anglo-centric or US-centric to
boot.

The second edition of this book aims to make advances on the first in each
of these respects. Five years of further research have allowed a greater accu¬
mulation and interpretation of more distinctly global data. Five years of
further reflection have permitted greater consolidation of theory. Regarding
interdisciplinarity, the second edition draws more widely from - and hope¬
fully better integrates - work in the fields of Anthropology, Business Studies,
Economics, Geography, History, Humanities, Law, Politics and Sociology.
With respect to interculturality, I hope the second edition shows positive
effects of my firsthand exposure in ten countries across Africa, Asia, Eastern



Preface to the Second Edition xv


Europe, the Middle East and Latin America, as well as my involvement in the
coordination of half a dozen global research projects since 2000.

The broad chapter structure of this edition remains the same as the first,
but the contents of the chapters are markedly different. Chapter 1 now
synthesizes a greatly expanded literature on globalization, with more than
double the number of sources consulted in its preparation. Chapter 2, now
twice its previous length, substantially reconsiders the definition of global¬
ization, with significant implications for the book as a whole. Chapter 3
redrafts the history of globalization in the light of the more carefully specified
definition. Chapter 4 more fully, explicitly and systematically delineates the
theoretical premises that inform contending analyses of globalization as well
as the account in this book. While Chapter 8 has been lightly revised, Chapter
5 (on production) has been more fully updated with recent data, trends and
literature. Chapters 6 (on governance) and 7 (on identity) have in addition
been considerably reconceived. Likewise, the consequences of contemporary
globalization for human security (Chapter 9), social equality (Chapter 10),
and democracy (Chapter 11) have been more thoroughly researched,
substantially reconceptualized, and more carefully weighed. As a result, it
may be hoped that the reflections for future policy offered in Chapter 12 are
more firmly grounded.

The ten objectives set out in the preface to the first edition of
Globalization: A Critical Introduction remain the same, but I hope the
second edition moves a bit closer to achieving these aims and leaves readers
more empowered to shape an increasingly global world in their preferred
directions. Nevertheless, remaining shortfalls in my own thinking, coupled
with ongoing deluges of events and publications around globalization, no
doubt guarantee the need for a third edition in due course.

Jan Aart Scholte


Note: all $ figures refer to United States dollars; all dates are by Christian
chronology (bc/ad).



Preface to the First Edition


Not another book on globalization! No doubt many a prospective reader will
at first despair that a further title has squeezed onto already overcrowded
shelves. Has this hype-propelled bandwagon not already slaughtered too
many trees?

In some respects critics have grounds to complain that recent years have
seen too much written about globalization. Aspiring academics, consultants,
journalists and politicians have all rushed to have their say on ‘the big G’.
Publishers have been only too happy to flog wares that sell. Some have even
slipped the term ‘globalization’ into titles of works that actually say nothing
on the subject.

Yet despite this feverish output of words, we arguably still have far to go
in consolidating concepts, methods and evidence with which to identify and
measure globalization. Likewise, the literature to date has produced few
tightly focused full-length assessments of the causes and consequences of
globalization. In these circumstances, ideas of globalization have readily
become so diverse, so broad, so loose, so changeable - in a word, so elusive -
that one can pronounce virtually anything on the subject.

This situation is worrying. More is at stake in the analysis of globalization
than publishers’ revenues and the careers of would-be gurus. A clear, precise,
explicit and consistently used concept of globalization can reveal a great deal
about continuity and change in contemporary social life. Such a notion can
also provide a basis for careful, critical and creative assessments of efficiency,
security, justice, democracy and ecological integrity in today’s world.
Globalization is too important to be handled casually and opportunistically.

With these concerns to the fore, my objectives in writing this book have
been:

(a) to develop a specific and distinct concept of globalization. Most exist¬
ing formulations are steeped in ambiguity and inconsistency, or merely
use ‘globalization’ as a synonym for other, older terms;

(b) to offer a multidimensional understanding of globalization. Most exist¬
ing examinations are more narrowly focused, for example, in political
economy, cultural studies, law, or social ecology;

(c) to address - squarely and systematically - questions concerning causa¬
tion and consequence. Existing studies of globalization tend to offer
only rather scattered observations on causation and limited coverage of
consequences;


XVII



xviii Preface to the First Edition


(d) to nurture a historical perspective that places contemporary develop¬
ments in a long-term context. Many existing accounts of globalization
have a shortsighted ‘presentist’ character;

(e) to appreciate the intricate interplay of continuity and change in global¬
ization. Far too often, debate has become mired in polarized exchanges
between smug ‘realists’ who deny change and exuberant ‘globalists’
who deny continuity;

(f) to ground the argument in a breadth and depth of both quantitative and
qualitative evidence. Past treatments of globalization frequently rely
too heavily on incidental illustration and anecdote;

(g) to acknowledge the diversity of experiences of globalization. Much of
the existing literature remains silent on issues of context, overlooking
different impacts and appreciations of globalization in relation to, for
example, age, class, country, gender, nationality, race, religion, sexual
proclivity, urban/rural location, and so on;

(h) to explore, carefully and systematically, a range of normative questions,
particularly in relation to security, equity and democracy. Much past
work on globalization involves facile celebration or unmeasured
critique;

(i) to reflect on the implications of the knowledge developed through
(a)-(h) for political action. Most existing academic works on globaliza¬
tion go little beyond general exhortations, if they consider policy
responses at all;

(j) to avoid oversimplification yet remain accessible and engaging for a
general reader. Too much public discussion of globalization has
become soundbite, while too much academic treatment of the subject
has slipped into unnecessary jargon and disempowering obfuscation.

In sum, I have aimed in this book to provide definition, description, peri¬
odization, explanation, judgement and - on the basis of this understanding -
cautious prescription. I have tried to be explicit with theory and careful with
evidence. The account is intended to be transdisciplinary and also sensitive to
social and historical context. The argument is meant to retain focus, clarity,
consistency and accessibility.

The book of course falls short of these aspirations at various points, but I
hope that the pursuit of foolhardy ambitions has nevertheless yielded a
provocative argument. The book will achieve its purpose if others are
inspired to refine, extend, critique or overthrow the knowledge presented
here. In the process readers will, I hope, take globalization that much more
seriously: in further research, in policy, and in the choices of everyday life.


Jan Aart Scholte



Acknowledgements


If anything, my debts in writing this book have accumulated even faster than
the literature on globalization over the past five years. An already dense list of
acknowledgements in the first edition would need to be expanded much
further still in order to name what are by now hundreds of individuals and
institutions who have given me insights, inspirations and other supports for
this book. Only a very abbreviated list can follow.

To begin with, heartfelt thanks are due to the many academic colleagues,
students and policy practitioners who have generously published reviews of
the first edition or given me private feedback. I accumulated a thick pile of
much-valued comments that have stimulated many changes for this new
version of the book. The revised argument does not come close to answering
all the criticisms, but I hope the analysis is improved for having heard them.

Even more than the first edition, my work of the past five years has bene¬
fited from affiliation with the Centre for the Study of Globalisation and
Regionalisation, based at the University of Warwick with a generous core
grant from the Economic and Social Research Council. A foremost acknowl¬
edgement is due to CSGR’s founding director, Richard Eliggott, and the other
staff, associates and visitors who have created such a positive professional
base for my studies.

During the interval between editions I have also had the privilege to work
on several policy-related projects that have significantly shaped my concep¬
tualization of globalization. CSGR and the United Nations University
supported a study of civil society and global finance. Projects with the
North-South Institute and the International Monetary Fund exposed me to
the heart of IMF relations with citizen groups. The Ford Foundation backed
a major wider examination of civil society and democracy in global affairs.
The latter undertaking could never have succeeded without the expertise of
ten dedicated country coordinators and the generosity of nearly 400
contributing civil society practitioners.

Throughout, the preparation of the second edition has had exceptional
support from my publisher, Steven Kennedy. Much appreciation is also due
to the expertise and patience of the production team coordinated by Keith
Povey and to Eliza Gaffney for help with the index.

Finally, with global research placing heavy demands on the most local
sphere, my deepest appreciation once more goes to Masha and Polly for living
this book with me.

Jan Aart Scholte


XIX



List of Abbreviations


ABM

ACP

ADR

AIDS

AMF

ANC

APEC

ARPANET

ASEAN

ASEM

AT&amp;T

ATM

BBC

BIS

BIT

BJP

BP

BRICS

BSE

CDF

CEDAW

CEO

CERD

CFC

CFSP

CHIPS

CIETAC

CITES

CJD

CLS

CNN

COIAB


anti-ballistic missile

African, Caribbean and Pacific

American Depository Receipt

acquired immunodeficiency syndrome

Asian Monetary Fund

African National Congress

Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation

Advanced Research Projects Agency Network

Association of South East Asian Nations

Asia-Europe Meetings

American Telephone and Telegraph Company

automated teller machine/Asynchronous Transfer Mode

British Broadcasting Corporation

Bank for International Settlements

bilateral investment treaty

Bharatiya Janata Tarty

British Petroleum

Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa
bovine spongiform encephalitis

Comprehensive Development Framework (of the World
Bank)

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women
Chief Executive Officer

Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
chlorofluorocarbon

Common Foreign and Security Policy (of the EU)

Clearing House Interbank Payment System
China International Economic Trade Arbitration
Commission

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species

of Wild Fauna and Flora

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease

Continuous Linked Settlement

Cable News Network

Coordination of Indigenous Peoples Organizations of
Brazil


xx



List of Abbreviations xxi


COSATU

Confederation of South African Trade Unions

CSGR

Centre for the Study of Globalisation and Regionalisation

CSO

civil society organization

CSR

corporate social responsibility

CUT

Central Workers’ Union (of Brazil)

DBS

direct broadcast satellite

DOT

Digital Opportunity Task Force (of the G8)

DSB

Dispute Settlement Body (of the WTO)

EAC

East African Community

Easdaq

European Association of Securities Dealers Automated
Quotation

ECU

European Currency Unit

EDS

Electronic Data Services

EPZ

export processing zone

ERM

(European) exchange-rate mechanism

ESF

European Social Forum

EU

European Union

FAO

(United Nations) Food and Agriculture Organization

FATF

Financial Action Task Force

FDI

foreign direct investment

FfD

Financing for Development

FLAG

Fibreoptic Link Around the Globe

FPZ

free production zone

FSC

Forest Stewardship Council

FT

Financial Times

FTA

free trade area

FT A A

Free Trade Area of the Americas

G7

Group of Seven

G8

Group of Eight

CIO

Group of Ten

G20

Group of Twenty

G24

Group of Twenty-Four

G77

Group of Seventy-Seven

GATT

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GCC

Gulf Cooperation Council

GDI

gender-related development index

GDP

gross domestic product

GDR

Global Depository Receipt

GEF

Global Environment Facility

GEO

Global Environmental Organization

GLOBE

Global Legislators Organization for a Balanced
Environment

GM

genetically modified



xxii List of Abbreviations


GRI

GSP

HAI

HDI

hinwi

HIPC

HIV

IAEA

LAIS

IASB

IATA

IB

ICANN

ICAO

ICBM

ICC

ICFTU

ICJ

ICT

IEC

IF AC

IIF

ILGA

ILO

IMF

INTELSAT

Interpol

IOE

IOSCO

IPR

IPU

IRA

ISDN

ISMA

ISO

IT

ITT

ITU

IUCN


Global Reporting Initiative

Generalized System of Preferences

Health Action International

Human Development Index

high net worth individual

Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative

human immunodeficiency virus

International Atomic Energy Agency

International Association of Insurance Supervisors

International Accounting Standards Board

International Air Transport Association

International Baccalaureate

Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
International Civil Aviation Organization
intercontinental ballistic missile
International Criminal Court/Inuit Circumpolar
Conference

International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
International Court of Justice
information and communications technologies
International Electrotechnical Commission
International Federation of Accountants
Institute of International Finance
International Lesbian and Gay Association
International Labour Organization

International Monetary Fund/International Metalworkers
Federation

International Telecommunications Satellite
Organization

International Criminal Police Organization

International Organization of Employers

International Organization of Securities Commissions

intellectual property right

Inter-Parliamentary Union

Irish Republican Army

Integrated Services Digital Network

International Securities Market Association

International Organization for Standardization

information technology

International Telephone &amp; Telegraph Corporation
International Telecommunication Union
International Union for the Conservation of Nature/World
Conservation Union



List of Abbreviations xxiii


IUF


IULA

LCA

lgbt

LIBOR

LME

LTCM

M&amp;A

MAI

MDGs

MERCOSUR

MFA

MOU

MSF

NAFTA

Nasdaq

NATO

NEPAD

NGO

NIC

NIEO

NPT

NWICO

NYSE

OAS

OAU

ODA

OECD

OIC

OPCW

OPEC

OPM

OSCE

OSSREA

PANA

PC

PGA

PRSP


International Union of Food, Agricultural, Hotel,
Restaurant, Catering, Tobacco and Allied Workers’
Associations

International Union of Local Authorities
London Court of Arbitration
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
London Inter-Bank Offered Rate
London Metal Exchange
Long Term Capital Management
merger(s) and acquisition(s)

Multilateral Agreement on Investment

Millennium Development Goals

Mercado Comun del Sur (Southern Common Market)

Multi-Fibre Arrangement

memorandum of understanding

Medecins sans frontieres (Doctors Without Borders)

North American Free Trade Agreement

National Association of Securities Dealers Automated

Quotation

North Atlantic Treaty Organization

New Partnership for Africa’s Development

nongovernmental organization

newly industrializing country

New International Economic Order

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

New World Information and Communications Order

New York Stock Exchange

Organization of American States

Organization of African Unity (now African Union)

overseas development assistance

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development

Organization of the Islamic Conference

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons

Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries

Organisasi Papua Merdeka (Free Papua Organization)

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Organization for Social Science Research in Eastern and

Southern Africa

Pan African News Agency

personal computer

Peoples’ Global Action against ‘Free’ Trade and the World

Trade Organization

Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper



xxiv List of Abbreviations


PSI

Public Services International

RITIMO

Reseau d’Information Tiers Monde (Third World
Information Network)

RSS

Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh

S&amp;P

Standard and Poor’s

SADC

Southern African Development Community

SARS

severe acute respiratory syndrome

SDI

Strategic Defense Initiative

SDR

Special Drawing Right

SDRM

Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism

SEZ

special economic zone

SWIFT

Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial
Telecommunications

TB

tuberculosis

TINA

there is no alternative

TOEFL

Teaching of English as a Foreign Language

TRIPS

Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(WTO Agreement on)

UN

United Nations

UNCTAD

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNEP

United Nations Environment Programme

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization

UNFPA

United Nations Fund for Population Activities

UNHCR

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

UNI

Union Network International

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

UNIFEM

United Nations Development Fund for Women

UNPO

Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization

UTC

universal time coordination

UTO

World Federation of United Towns

VAT

value-added tax

VHP

Vishwa Hindu Parishad

WACLAC

World Associations of Cities and Local Authorities
Coordination

WCL

World Confederation of Labour

WEF

World Economic Forum

WHO

World Health Organization

WIN

World Insurance Network

WIPO

World Intellectual Property Organization

WMCASPM

White Middle-Class Anglo-Saxon Protestant Male

WMD

weapons of mass destruction



List of Abbreviations xxv


WRI

WSF

WSIS

WSJ

WSJ-E

WTO

WWF

Y2K


World Resources Institute
World Social Forum

World Summit on the Information Society

Wall Street Journal

Wall Street Journal (Europe edition)

World Trade Organization/World Tourism Organization
World Wildlife Federation/World Wide Fund for Nature
year 2000 (millennium bug for computers)



Introduction


Framework of analysis
Change and continuity
Normative and policy issues


‘We don’t know what globalization is, but we have to act!’ So spoke a peas¬
ant activist in Thailand recently (Sopa, 2002). His exclamation - where
conviction meets uncertainly to yield frustration - well epitomizes current
knowledge and politics of globalization. It is impossible to avoid the issue,
but difficult to specify what it involves. Concerned citizens feel a need to
respond, but most are unclear how. Globalization is regularly characterized
as one of the greatest challenges before humankind today, but what is to be
done about it?

What is globalization? When has globalization emerged and spread? Why
has globalization occurred? How, if at all, has globalization generated social
change? What benefits and harms have flowed from globalization? Inasmuch
as globalization can bring good, how can the positive outcomes be maxi¬
mized? Insofar as globalization can have ill effects, how might they be
avoided? These questions, which grip much contemporary political debate,
form the core concerns of this book.

‘Globalization’ stands out for a large public, spread across the world, as
one of the defining terms of contemporary society. The former Prime
Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir Mohamad, is one of many who have
proclaimed the twenty-first to be a ‘global century’ (Nederveen Pieterse,
2000: 4). The first Director-General of the World Trade Organization
(WTO), Renato Ruggiero, described globalization as a reality ‘which over¬
whelms all others’ (WTO-2, 1996b). Although such pronouncements may
slip into hyperbole, it is clear that substantial parts of humanity have staked
significant parts of their policies, their fortunes, their careers, their identities
and their convictions on the premise that the present is an increasingly global
world.

Yet, if asked to specify what they understand by ‘globalization’, most
people reply with considerable hesitation, vagueness, and inconsistency.
Moreover, much discussion of globalization is steeped in oversimplification,
exaggeration and wishful thinking. In spite of a deluge of publications on the
subject, analyses of globalization tend on the whole to remain conceptually
inexact, empirically thin, historically ill-informed, economically and/or
culturally illiterate, normatively shallow, and politically naive. Although
globalization is widely assumed to be crucially important, people generally
have scant idea what, more precisely, it entails and how they should respond


1



2 Globalization: A Critical Introduction


to it. As media magnate Ted Turner has put it, ‘globalization is in fast-
forward, and the world’s ability to understand and react to it is in slow
motion’ (HDR, 1999:100).

This highly unsatisfactory situation - one that has often also afflicted my
own thinking on globalization - is what prompted me to write this book.
While inevitably it does not come close to resolving the problems, my hope is
that the text will help readers to engage with - and advance - what are often
muddled and deadlocked debates.

As its title indicates, the book offers a critical introduction. It is critical of
the widespread loose use of the term ‘globalization’. It is critical of many
(often wild) claims that have been made about globalization. It is critical of
many consequences of globalization to date, and it is critical of inadequate
policy responses to those negative effects. In the course of critique, however,
the book also aims to offer positive ways forward for knowledge and politics
of globalization.

The argument develops in three main steps. The first phase (Part I:
Chapters 1-4) establishes a framework of analysis. The second phase (Part II:
Chapters 5-8) examines impacts on social order. The third phase (Part III:
Chapters 9-12) explores normative and policy issues. The rest of this intro¬
duction summarizes the argument that is developed through this three-part
structure of the book.


Framework of analysis

The four chapters in Part I elaborate, in turn: the key issues in debates
surrounding globalization; a general definition of the process; a chronology
of the trend; and an account of the causal dynamics involved in globalization.
These chapters both specify the approach adopted in this book and compare
that perspective with the main competing viewpoints taken elsewhere in the
literature on globalization.

Chapter 1, on globalization debates, surveys the wide array of claims and
counterclaims that have been made in connection with globalization.
Regarding definition, for example, some people equate ‘global’ relations with
‘international’ relations, while others emphasize a difference between the two
notions. In respect of scale, some analysts see globalization as a pervasive and
overriding fact of contemporary society, while others dismiss globalization as a
fantasy. Concerning chronology, some say that globalization is a recent devel¬
opment, while others date its beginnings far back in history. As regards expla¬
nation, some account for globalization in materialist terms of capitalism and
technology, while others emphasize ideational forces connected with identity
and knowledge. On the question of social change, some assessments affirm that
globalization is fundamentally reconfiguring contemporary society, while




Introduction 3


others assert that old social structures persist unaffected. In normative terms,
some evaluations champion globalization, while others denounce its conse¬
quences. With regard to policy, different people have promoted competing
neoliberalist, rejectionist, reformist, and transformist courses of action. In
short, the first chapter summarizes what is at issue in current deliberations
about globalization.

Chapter 2 focuses in more detail on the vexed issue of defining globaliza¬
tion. Five general conceptions are distinguished: globalization as internation¬
alization; globalization as liberalization; globalization as universalization;
globalization as westernization; and globalization as respatialization with the
spread of transplanetary social connections. It is argued that the first four
definitions are largely redundant. Only the last notion gives ‘globalization’ a
distinctive meaning - and at the same time identifies a key contemporary
historical development. In the remainder of the book, therefore, globalization
refers to the advent and spread of what are alternately called ‘global’, ‘trans¬
planetary’, ‘transworld’ and in certain respects also ‘supraterritorial’ social
spaces. That said - as Chapter 2 also stresses - the contemporary rise of trans¬
planetary and supraterritorial connectivity has by no means brought an end
to territorial geography and associated economies, governments and identi¬
ties. Global and territorial spaces coexist and interrelate in complex fashions.

Chapter 3 situates globalization in history, addressing the hotly contested
questions of chronology and periodization. Here it is argued that, if global¬
ization is understood as the spread of transplanetary and supraterritorial
relations, then the trend has mainly unfolded in the past half-century. True,
harbingers of globality can be traced back hundreds of years, and notable
transworld connectedness existed from the middle of the nineteenth century.
However, as evidence presented in Chapter 3 indicates, the greatest expan¬
sion of transplanetary relations - including the main emergence of supra-
territoriality - has transpired since the middle of the twentieth century.
Moreover, at the moment the trend shows little sign of stopping, let alone
reversing.

Chapter 4 explores explanations of globalization. This issue is key, since
explanation forms a basis for prediction, prescription and action.
Assessments of the consequences of, and workable policy responses to, glob¬
alization depend largely on interpretations of the forces that have generated
the trend. The first half of the chapter reviews a number of contending theor¬
ies of globalization, including liberalism with its emphasis on market
economics, political realism with its emphasis on power politics, Marxism
with its emphasis on capitalist dynamics, constructivism with its emphasis on
inter-subjective communication, poststructuralism with its emphasis on
knowledge power, and feminism with its emphasis on gender relations. The
second half of the chapter then elaborates the eclectic historical-sociological
approach that is adopted in this book. Taking that perspective, the rise of



4 Globalization: A Critical Introduction


transplanetary connectivity is argued to result mainly from a combination of:
(a) certain turns in capitalist development; (b) an enabling regulatory appa¬
ratus provided through a host of state, suprastate and private governance
mechanisms; (c) several circumstances in the construction of identities; and
(d) important aspects of modern rationalist knowledge.

In sum, Part I establishes that globalization is a distinctive and significant
feature of recent world history that involves several of the core forces of
modern social relations. True, much talk of globalization is muddled, redun¬
dant, unsubstantiated and hyped. However, the concept can be constructed
in ways that it brings to light important circumstances of contemporary soci¬
ety that other vocabulary and analysis does not reveal.


Change and continuity

Drawing on the general framework of analysis developed in Part I, the second
set of four chapters assesses in what ways and to what extent globalization
has affected the social order. Globalization is simultaneously an effect and a
cause. It is both an explanandum (something to be explained) and an
explanans (something that - partly - explains). Whereas Chapter 4 examines
the social forces that have prompted the growth of transplanetary and
supraterritorial connectivity (that is, globalization as outcome), Chapters
5-8 consider how this reconfiguration of geography has in turn affected other
aspects of social structure (that is, globalization as causal force). In a word,
has globalization while reorganizing social space also encouraged wider
social transformations?

Chapter 5, on the subject of globalization and production, argues that, at
the same time that transplanetary connections have arisen partly out of capi¬
talism, they have also reverberated back to help reshape and extend capital¬
ism. Contemporary accelerated globalization has done little thus far to
challenge the predominance of capitalism, that is, an economy centred on
surplus accumulation. On the contrary, the growth of transworld spaces has
encouraged major extensions of capitalist production, including in areas of
information, communications, finance, mass consumerism, and biotechnol¬
ogy. The spread of global relations has also brought some notable shifts in the
ways that processes of surplus accumulation operate. Examples include
offshore arrangements and transworld corporate alliances. However, global¬
ization has not put the structure of capitalism itself under threat. If anything,
the current more global situation has become one of hypercapitalism.

Chapter 6, regarding globalization and governance, suggests that greater
transplanetary connectivity has promoted a shift from a statist to a polycen¬
tric mode of regulation. This chapter first dismisses frequently heard claims
that heightened globalization is prompting a general retreat or even demise of



Introduction 5


the territorial state. National governments have remained a major locus of
regulation and have shown no sign of moving towards dissolution. However,
globalization has encouraged changes in several significant features of the
state, for instance, in terms of the constituencies that it serves and the policy
tools that it uses. Moreover, the old statist focus on centralized country
governments as the sole site of governance is not viable in a more global
world. The spread of transplanetary relations has stimulated a growing role
in regulation for substate, suprastate and nonstate agencies. In this way large-
scale globalization during contemporary history has helped to open an era of
polycentrism, with multiscalar and diffuse governance.

Chapter 7, on globalization and identity, maintains that the recent
unprecedented expansion of transworld relations has tended to attenuate
nationality, particularly as this sense of self and community is connected with
established states. State-nations remain important, but they have lost the
near-monopoly on constructions of collective identity that they held in the
early and mid-twentieth century. In addition, globalization has encouraged a
dissociation of many notions of nationhood from existing states. The spread
of transplanetary relations has thereby furthered a growth of micro-nations
on a substate scale, region-nations on a suprastate scale, and transworld
national diasporas. At the same time, globalization has advanced a number of
other, nonterritorial constructions of identity, for instance, connected to
faith, class, gender, or humankind as a whole. Overall, then, globalization
has stimulated a pluralization of identities, with a host of different national
and nonterritorial frameworks of being and belonging. Often this pluraliza¬
tion has converged on individual persons, who then experience a hybrid sense
of self that encompasses a melange of several nationalities and nonterritorial
affiliations.

Chapter 8 completes this book’s assessment of change and continuity in
social structures by examining the consequences of globalization for know¬
ledge. At the same time as arising partly out of modern rationalism, the
spread of transplanetary connections has also had repercussions for that
structure of knowledge. On the one hand, expanding globality has often
promoted an extension of modern rationality: that is, secular, anthropocen¬
tric, instrumental, techno-scientific thinking. On the other hand, globaliza¬
tion has also encouraged some anti-rationalist reactions, in forms such as
religious revivalism and postmodernism. In addition, the spread of
transworld relations has furthered some shifts in ontologies, in methodolo¬
gies, and in aesthetics. In general, contemporary globalization has promoted
a move from unquestioning rationalise to more reflexive rationality.

In sum, Part II suggests that the past half-century of intense globalization,
as a major reconfiguration of social geography, has unfolded in conjunction
with several important shifts in other primary social structures. The growth
of transplanetary and supraterritorial spaces has both encouraged, and been



6 Globalization: A Critical Introduction


encouraged by, the emergence of: (a) new forms of capitalist production; (b)
multilayered and more diffuse governance; (c) multidimensional and more
hybrid identities; and (d) greater questioning of rationalist knowledge. At the
same time, the spread of transworld connections has thus far shown few signs
of bringing an end to capital, state, nation, and modern rationality. As ever in
history, then, globalization has involved an intricate interplay of change and
continuity.


Normative and policy issues

As Part III of the book indicates, the changes and continuities associated with
globalization can have both positive and negative impacts on the quality of
life. The normative evaluation of globalization undertaken in the third set of
chapters highlights themes of human security, social equality, and demo¬
cracy. Some readers might expect issues of economic efficiency also to be
highlighted as a principal policy concern. For example, mainstream econo¬
mists would tend to judge globalization largely in terms of the gains or losses
that it brings to the productive deployment of scarce world resources.
However, the perspective taken in this book regards economic efficiency and
growth as secondary to - and in the service of - security, equality and democ¬
racy. Productivity is therefore not treated as a primary normative question in
its own right.

Chapter 9, on the subject of ‘Globalization and (In)Security’, investi¬
gates how the rise of transplanetary and supraterritorial connections
between people has affected conditions of confidence and danger in soci¬
ety. The discussion examines human security in a multifaceted fashion,
covering peace, crime, ecological integrity, health, poverty, financial
stability, employment, working conditions, identity, knowledge and social
cohesion. Across these various aspects of risk the evidence is mixed. In
some respects globalization has promoted increased human security, for
example, with certain disincentives to war, improved means of humani¬
tarian relief, new job opportunities, and greater cultural pluralism.
However, in other ways globalization has helped to perpetuate or even
deepen armed conflict, environmental degradation, epidemics, poverty,
financial crises, unemployment, exploitation of workers, cultural destruc¬
tion, and social disintegration. Yet none of these positive or negative
consequences for human security has been intrinsic to increased globality
per se. In each case, the outcome has resulted from the policies adopted
towards the reconfigured social geography. Political choice is the key.

Chapter 10 considers the hotly contested question of ‘Globalization and
(In)Equality’. This issue is examined in terms of the distribution of life
chances on lines of class, country, gender, race, urban/rural divides, age, and



Introduction 7


(dis)ability. Again the evidence turns up mixed. On the positive side, the
intense globalization of recent decades has in certain cases improved possi¬
bilities for young people, poor countries, women and other subordinated
social circles to realize their potentials. More negatively, however, globaliza¬
tion has in other cases reinforced or increased various arbitrary hierarchies in
contemporary society. Again, however, the important variable in the rela¬
tionship between globalization and (in)equality has generally not been
globalization as such, but rather the policy approach to that trend. A more
global world can be more equal if people choose to make it so.

Chapter 11 addresses the problem of ‘Globalization and (Un)Democracy’.
Here claims that a more global world offers people greater opportunities for
collective self-determination are assessed against arguments that globaliza¬
tion has deepened democratic deficits. On the one hand, the contemporary
period of increased transplanetary connectivity has paralleled a spread of
liberal democratic institutions to an unprecedented number of states.
However, citizens have far from adequate involvement and control in current
governance of global relations. Much of these democratic shortfalls result
from ignorance, as schools, the mass media, civil society associations and
governance agencies themselves fail to educate the public sufficiently about
globalization. Other democratic shortcomings lie in institutional arrange¬
ments, as elections, parliaments and courts fail to provide adequate mecha¬
nisms for public participation and public accountability in the regulation of
global relations. In addition, the various deep social inequalities discussed in
Chapter 10 have severely detrimental effects on democracy in the contempo¬
rary globalizing world. Once more, however, the problem is not globalization
itself, but the ways that it has been approached to date. Other, more democ¬
ratic, globalizations are possible.

Thus circumstances in each of the main areas of normative concern -
human security, social equality, and democracy - have developed mainly as a
result of policy choices in respect of globalization. To the extent that
outcomes have been unhappy so far, different policies could improve matters.
Under the title of ‘(Re)constructing Future Globalizations’, Chapter 12
considers various strategies and measures that might steer growing trans¬
planetary connectivity in more positive directions. After critically reviewing
neoliberalist, rejectionist, reformist and transformist approaches to shaping
globalization, this book opts to advocate a mix of ‘ambitious reformism’ and
‘cautious transformism’ as the most practicable progressive course available
at the present time. A number of measures are suggested that could bring
substantially greater human security, social equality and democracy within
an overall social order that is increasingly structured by hypercapitalism,
polycentric governance, hybrid identities, and reflexive rationality. The
opportunities for, and the obstacles to, achieving these alternative globaliza¬
tions are also evaluated.



8 Globalization: A Critical Introduction


Core theses on globalization

(1) globalization is best understood as a reconfiguration of social geog¬
raphy marked by the growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial
connections between people

(2) although globalization so defined made earlier appearances, the trend
has unfolded at greatest speeds, on greatest scales, to greatest extents,
and with greatest impacts since the middle of the twentieth century

(3) with regard to causality, globalization as a development in the struc¬
ture of geography is closely interrelated with concurrent develop¬
ments in structures of production, governance, identity and
knowledge

(4a) contemporary intense globalization is marked by continuity inas¬
much as the trend has not erased primary pre-existent social struc¬
tures such as territorialist geography, capitalist production, state
governance, national identity and rationalist knowledge

but

(4b) globalization has also prompted notable changes in certain attributes
of territoriality, capital, state, nation and modern rationality

and

(4c) globalization has encouraged the growth of additional areas and
forms of accumulation, non-state loci of governance, non-national
forms of identity, and non-rationalist types of knowledge

(5a) contemporary intense globalization has had some important positive
consequences with respect to human security, social equality, and
democracy

but

(5b) the recent unprecedented growth of transplanetary and supraterrito¬
rial connectivity has also been associated with various heightened
insecurities, exacerbated inequalities and deepened democratic
deficits

(6a) these positive and negative outcomes have not flowed from global¬
ization as such, but from policy choices that can be debated and
changed

and

(6b) contemporary globalization could yield much better results in terms
of human security, social equality, and democracy with a change of
policy course from neoliberalism to a blend of ambitious reformism
and cautious transformism, although the political challenges of
achieving this reorientation must not be underestimated.


In sum, Part III advances an indictment of neoliberalist globalization, not
a condemnation of globalization as such. (The distinguishing features of
neoliberalism are detailed in Chapter 1.) Insofar as globalization to date has



Introduction 9


often increased insecurity, inequality and democratic deficits, these negative
outcomes can be largely attributed to the neoliberalist policy frameworks
that have dominated the (mis)management of transplanetary and supraterri-
torial spaces since the 1980s. Alternative, better approaches are available for
the future.

In a word, then, this book aims to advance understandings of globalization
that can help to shape the process in positive directions. For convenient refer¬
ence, the core points of the overall argument are reviewed in the box on page
8. Readers will also find boxes elsewhere in the book that summarize the
contents of the respective chapters.



Part I


Framework of Analysis



Since everything concerning globalization is deeply contested, nothing about
it can be taken for granted. Each account of the issue has to make its starting
points explicit and clear. A lengthy first part of this book must therefore care¬
fully establish a general framework for analysing globalization.

To this end Chapter 1 sets the scene of debate with a survey of the many
points of disagreement about globalization. Chapter 2 examines various
notions of globalization and particularly specifies the definition that guides
the analysis in this book. Chapter 3 elaborates a chronology of globalization
that corresponds to this conception. Chapter 4 then considers different explan¬
ations of globalization and presents the account that informs the present
book. With the framework of analysis thus developed in hand, the conse¬
quences of globalization can be systematically explored in Parts II and III.


12



Chaper 1

Globalization Debates

Main points of this chapter
Where to start?

Continuity or change?

Liberation or shackles?

What to do?

Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• globalization is a thoroughly contested subject

• many of the disputes relate to starting premises regarding the definition,
measurement, chronology and explanation of globalization

• other debates concern the ways and extents that globalization has or has
not changed society, including its primary structures of production,
governance, identity and knowledge

• additional arguments centre on normative evaluations of globalization,
namely, whether it enhances or undermines human security, social
equality and democracy

• further disagreements revolve around policy responses to globalization,
in particular between neoliberalist, rejectionist, reformist and transformist
strategies


Along the road between Iganga and Mbale, a crew heaves pickaxes to lay
fibre-optic cable that will connect peripheral districts of eastern Uganda into
global telecommunications networks. In New Delhi, taxi chauffeurs ask their
foreign passengers how many hours’ flying away they live. To mark post-
Soviet times, a billboard in Moscow directs consumers to a ‘Super Shop’
called ‘Global USA’, located down the street from Lenin’s tomb. Another
sign, rising above the favelas of Sao Paulo, urges passing drivers to ‘Globalize
Jesus!’, while an Islamist in Tehran celebrates global governance as the
coming of the Mahdi, the twelfth Imam. In the Nile Delta a transborder
company’s local buyer of potatoes for the fryers of Europe adorns life with
mobile phone, fashion spectacles, satellite television and sports utility vehicle,
all the while dressed in traditional galabeyya. A boutique in Portland, Oregon,


13




14 Framework of Analysis


sells ‘global clothing’, while a restaurant on London’s Brompton Road
peddles ‘global food’. From Beijing to Johannesburg, from Davos to Porto
Alegre, a stream of world summits and world forums discuss the implications
of globalization for human security, social equality and democracy.

These snapshots relate just a few of the countless occasions - across conti¬
nents, age groups, classes, cultures, races, sexes, and urban and rural settings
- when the present author has encountered ‘global-ness’ while writing (and
now rewriting) this book. No doubt all readers can assemble their own collec¬
tion of such incidents, if perhaps not as scattered as the above examples. It is
today pretty well impossible to avoid the issue of globalization. ‘Global-
speak’ has become standard fare among journalists, politicians, managers,
advertisers, bankers, entertainers, officials, computer experts, activists and
researchers across the planet. The vocabulary of ‘globalization’ has entered
almost all of the world’s major languages. Daily life now brings continual
references to global communications, global finance, global health problems,
global markets, global migration, and global justice.

‘Globalization’ has also become a heavily loaded word. People have linked
the notion to pretty well every purported contemporary social change, with
arguments about an emergent information age, a retreat of the state, the
demise of traditional cultures, and the advent of a postmodern epoch. In
normative terms, some people have associated globalization with progress,
prosperity and peace. For others, however, the word has conjured up depri¬
vation, disaster and doom. No one is indifferent. Most are confused.

To begin to bring some order to this analytical disarray, the present open¬
ing chapter maps the many claims and counterclaims that have been made
about globalization. At the same time the following pages locate the argu¬
ments advanced in this book within those debates. From this discussion read¬
ers can obtain both a survey of existing globalization research and a preview
of the particular perspective taken between these covers.

The first section notes the highly diverse starting points that people have
adopted when they examine globalization. In other words, these paragraphs
foreshadow the issues that are addressed in detail in the rest of Part I. The
second section of the chapter surveys various affirmations and denials of
social change that analysts have connected with globalization. These para¬
graphs thus introduce the questions treated more fully in Part II. The third
section assembles multiple plaudits and denunciations of globalization, while
the fourth section lays out the broad spectrum of policy lines that can be
advocated in respect of globalization. These last two sections thereby review
the matters that are handled at length in Part III.

Of course the diversity of published arguments about globalization must
not be exaggerated. After all, most research on the subject has emanated from
countries of the North and is published in English. Moreover, most studies of
globalization have come from a limited social base of urban-based, white,



Globalization Debates 15


professional, Judaeo-Christian, middle-aged men. Given these biases, the
existing literature - however wide-ranging it may be - does not adequately
cover many experiences of globalization.


Where to start?

Many debates about globalization never get past disputes over starting
premises regarding definition, scale, chronology and explanatory frame¬
work. On definition, people have often conceived of globalization in radically
different terms, thereby talking past each other from the outset. On scale,
people have made widely varying assessments of the extent of globalization.
At one end of the spectrum certain observers claim that today’s world is fully
globalized; at the opposite pole ultra-sceptics deny that any globalization
whatsoever has occurred. On questions of chronology, some accounts trace
globalization back to ancient history, while others date its origins back only
several decades. Regarding explanations, analysts have identified widely
differing cultural, economic, political and/or technological dynamics of glob¬
alization. With such contrasting starting points, many globalization debates
have been foredoomed to deadlock.

What's in a word?

Disputes and confusions about globalization often begin around issues of
definition. Indeed, many people invoke notions of globalization without indi¬
cating explicitly what they mean by the term. For example, various comment¬
ators have described globalization as ‘a stage of capitalism’ or ‘late
modernity’ without specifying the content of such phrases. Or authors have
made unfocused remarks that globalization is ‘a new way of thinking’.
Circular definitions are not much help either, with statements like ‘globaliza¬
tion is the present process of becoming global’ (Archer, 1990:1). In these and
other ways, ‘globalization’ has frequently become a label to cover whatever
strikes the fancy. Little wonder, then, that critics have decried the emptiness
of ‘global babble’. As early as 1943 a US congresswoman complained that it
was all ‘globaloney’ (Luce, 1943).

Yet such wholesale rejections are unfair. After all, many key notions in
social analysis can be used loosely and vaguely. How often does one find
airtight conceptualizations of‘class’, ‘culture’, ‘money’, ‘law’, ‘development’,
‘international’, etc.? Moreover, some usages of ‘globalization’ are consider¬
ably more illuminating than loose globe talk. A serious academic literature on
the subject has developed over the past two decades.

All the same, confusion persists because the more specific ideas of global¬
ization are often highly diverse. At least five broad conceptions can be



16 Framework of Analysis


distinguished. These definitions are in some ways related and to some extent
overlapping, but their emphases are substantially different.

One common notion has conceived of globalization in terms of inter¬
nationalization. From this perspective, ‘global’ is simply another adjective to
describe cross-border relations between countries, and ‘globalization’ design¬
ates a growth of international exchange and interdependence. In this vein
Paul Flirst and Grahame Thompson have identified globalization in terms of
‘large and growing flows of trade and capital investment between countries’
(1996:48). Evidence of such ‘globalization’ is purportedly also to be found in
enlarged movements between countries of people, diseases, messages and
ideas.

A second usage has viewed globalization as liberalization. Here ‘global¬
ization’ refers to a process of removing state-imposed restrictions on move¬
ments between countries in order to create an ‘open’, ‘borderless’ world
economy. On these lines one analyst suggests that ‘globalization has become
a prominent catchword for describing the process of international economic
integration’ (Sander, 1996: 27). Evidence for such ‘globalization’ in recent
decades can be found in the widespread reduction or even abolition of regu¬
latory trade barriers, foreign-exchange restrictions, capital controls, and (for
citizens of certain states) visas.

A third conception has equated globalization with universalization.
Indeed, when Oliver Reiser and Blodwen Davies coined the verb ‘globalize’ in
the 1940s, they took it to mean ‘universalize’ and foresaw ‘a planetary
synthesis of cultures’ in a ‘global humanism’ (1944: 39, 201, 205,219,225).
In this usage, ‘global’ means ‘worldwide’, and ‘globalization’ is the process of
spreading various objects and experiences to people at all corners of the earth.
We could in this sense have a ‘globalization’ of automobiles, Chinese restau¬
rants, decolonization, cattle farming, and much more.

A fourth definition has treated globalization as westernization or modern¬
ization, especially in an ‘Americanized’ form (Spybey, 1996; Taylor, 2000).
Following this idea, globalization is a dynamic whereby the social structures
of modernity (capitalism, rationalism, industrialism, bureaucratism, indivi¬
dualism, and so on) are spread the world over, normally destroying pre-exis¬
tent cultures and local self-determination in the process. ‘Globalization’ in
this sense is sometimes described as an imperialism of McDonald’s,
Hollywood and CNN (Schiller, 1991; Barber, 1996; Ritzer, 1996; Gowan,
1999). Martin Khor has similarly declared that ‘globalization is what we in
the Third World have for several centuries called colonization’ (Khor, 1995;
see also Biel, 2000; Ling, 2000).

A fifth approach - one that is developed in this book - has identified glob¬
alization as respatialization. Following this interpretation, globalization
entails a reconfiguration of social geography with increased transplanetary
connections between people. On these lines, for example, David Held and



Globalization Debates 17


Anthony McGrew have defined globalization as ‘a process (or set of
processes) which embodies a transformation in the spatial organization of
social relations and transactions’ (Held et al., 1999: 16; also Massey, 1994;
Short, 2001; Rosenau, 2003). In particular, some authors have associated
contemporary globalization with a tendency towards deterritorialization, so
that social space can no longer be wholly mapped in terms of territorial
places, territorial distances and territorial borders (O Tuathail, 2000). In this
vein the present book highlights the rise of supraterritoriality in contemp¬
orary globalization.

Each of these five conceptions can generate an elaborate and in one or
another way revealing account of contemporary history. However, in spite of
some overlap between these various notions, their respective foci are signifi¬
cantly different. Thus, for example, people who identify globalization as
internationalization and people who approach it as respatialization develop
very different understandings of the problem.


Fact or fantasy?

Both when they agree and when they disagree on the general definition of
globalization, people have often held widely differing assessments regarding
the extent of the development. On the one hand, analysts who might be char¬
acterized as ‘globalists’ claim that contemporary social relations have become
thoroughly globalized. Globalists also tend to regard globalization as the
single most important fact of contemporary history. In contrast, ultra¬
sceptics have dismissed any notion of globalization as myth. Between these
extremes, other analysts have treated globalization as a significant trend, but
one that coexists with other important developments and is far from finished.
These more measured accounts have often also stressed the uneven incidence
of globalization among countries, classes, and other social groupings.

Globalist pronouncements about the ubiquity and all-importance of glob¬
alization have issued both from gung-ho supporters of the trend and from its
implacable opponents. The promoters have included a number of corporate
consultants and champions of new technologies. For example, management
gurus like Kenichi Ohmae and John Naisbitt have created bestsellers with
their praises of a ‘borderless world’ (Ohmae, 1990; Naisbitt, 1994). Much of
the business press has heralded ‘the stateless enterprise’ that maximizes effi¬
ciency and profits by operating freely across a global field (Holstein et al.,
1990). Similarly, many Internet enthusiasts have regularly overstated the
number of online connections and the scale of electronic commerce. Many
advertisers, journalists, politicians and others prone to hyperbole have also
celebrated the present as a thoroughly globalized world.

Some critics of current directions of globalization have also made strong
claims about the scale of the process. For instance, a number of civil society



18 Framework of Analysis


activists and dissident academics have suggested that global corporations
now rule the world (Barnet and Cavanagh, 1994; Brecher and Costello, 1994;
Korten, 1995; Berger et ai, 1998-9; Barlow and Clarke, 2001). On similar
lines many of the same circles have denounced global governance agencies
like the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the WTO
for usurping power from states and local governments (Barker and Mander,
n.d.; George and Sabelli, 1994; Burbach and Danaher, 2000). Meanwhile a
number of religious revivalists and reactionary nationalists have protested
that a deluge of globalization is erasing traditional cultures. In this vein the
National Front leader in France, Jean-Marie Le Pen, has railed against his
country being sent to the ‘abattoirs of Euro-globalization’ (Globe and Mail,
3 May 2002: A7).

Whether as supporters or as critics of globalization, globalists have
regarded the trend as holding foremost and overriding importance in contemp¬
orary history. In this vein several writers have taken the current growth of
global communications to be as significant as the spread of printing presses
500 years ago, the invention of writing 5,000 years ago, or the development
of human speech 40,000 years ago (Ploman, 1984:37; Gates, 1995: 8-9). For
his part the former President of Brazil, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, has
affirmed that the implications of global consciousness are as great for the
present day as was the Copernican revelation, five centuries ago, that the
earth revolved about the sun rather than vice versa (Cardoso, 1996).

At an opposite extreme to globalist pronouncements, ultra-sceptics have
denied the existence of any such thing as globalization. For these analysts, all
globe-talk is empty jargon, fad, hype, myth and rhetoric. Claims concerning
globalization are greatly exaggerated, if not utter fantasy. Doubters have
dismissed talk of ‘globalization’ as new-fangled vocabulary for age-old
conditions of world politics. Studies of this phantom subject are therefore a
waste of time. Shut this book!

From the sceptics’ standpoint, much that is said about the so-called
‘global’ economy is mythical (Zysman, 1996; Hirst and Thompson 1999: 2,
6; Helliwell, 2000). Purportedly ‘global’ companies are in fact deeply embed¬
ded in their respective home countries, and their actions are thoroughly
enmeshed in the logic of interstate relations (Kapstein, 1991-2; Ruigrok and
Van Tulder, 1995; Doremus et al., 1998). Indeed, for these analysts alleged
‘globalization’ has done and will do nothing to alter the basic fact of world
politics, namely, the sovereign state (Krasner, 1994; Nicholson, 1999). So-
called ‘global’ governance institutions have not exercised any power sepa¬
rately from their state members. Talk of ‘global’ civil society and ‘global’
culture is similarly nonsense.

Others like the present author have fallen between the globalist and ultra-
sceptical extremes. From such a perspective globalization is indeed a distinc¬
tive and important development in contemporary world history. However,



Globalization Debates 19


its scale and consequences need to be carefully measured and qualified. Nor
is globalization the only, or in all situations the most significant, trend in soci¬
ety today. Rather, it unfolds alongside - and is closely interlinked with - other
major social trends, like the shifts in structures of production, governance,
identity and knowledge that are considered in Part II.

In addition, more measured assessments of the scale of globalization have
often emphasized the uneven spread of the process. On such an account, some
countries (like the USA) and regions (like Western Europe) have generally
experienced more globalization than others (like Mongolia or Sub-Saharan
Africa). Likewise, urban centres have on the whole accumulated more global
connections than rural areas. Global relations have also tended to fall
unevenly across different age groups, classes, cultures, genders and races. In a
word, measurements of globalization are far more complex than either the
globalists or the ultra-sceptics make out.

Old or new?

Along with definition and scale, another issue of starting principles in debates
about globalization concerns chronology. Is the spread of global relations
new to contemporary history? Or did the trend start several generations,
centuries or even millennia ago? Or is globalization a cyclical phenomenon
that comes and goes from time to time? As might be expected, the chronology
that one describes varies with the definition that one adopts.

For example, analysts who define globalization in terms of international¬
ization or liberalization often regard the process as a recurrent trend that has
appeared at several previous junctures in the history of the modern states-
system. In this vein Ian Clark has distinguished alternating phases of ‘global¬
ization’ and ‘fragmentation’ in international history (Clark, 1997). A number
of studies have emphasized that, in proportional terms, levels of trade,
permanent migration and investment between countries were as high (if not
higher) in the late nineteenth century as they were in the run-up to 2000 (cf.
Zevin, 1992; Wade, 1996; Hirst and Thompson, 1999; O’Rourke and
Williamson, 1999). On the grounds of such evidence many commentators
have declared that there is nothing new in contemporary globalization.

Other accounts also give globalization a long history, but view it in linear
rather than cyclical terms. These authors generally hold that globalization
started on a small scale anywhere from 100 to 500 years ago and reached
unprecedented rates in recent decades. In this fashion, Roland Robertson has
spoken of a ‘germination phase’ of globalization between the early fifteenth
and the mid-eighteenth centuries and a ‘take-off’ period from the middle of
the nineteenth century (1992: 58-9). For their part, the business analyst
Michael Porter and the world-systems theorist Christopher Chase-Dunn
have located the start of globalization in the late nineteenth century (Porter,



20 Framework of Analysis


1986: 42; Chase-Dunn, 1989: 2). On the other hand, this perspective on the
history of globalization sees important quantitative and qualitative differ¬
ences between the nineteenth century and the present day (Baldwin and
Martin, 1999; Bordo etal., 1999; Keohane and Nye, 2000).

Meanwhile, other arguments suggest that globalization has been entirely
novel to present times. On these accounts global relations only dawned with
the jet aeroplane and the computer network. From such a perspective, current
history is experiencing a ‘first global revolution’ and a sudden leap to ‘new
realities’ (Drucker, 1989; King and Schneider, 1991).

By adopting a conception of globalization as the growth of transplanetary
and more particularly supraterritorial social relations, the present book
draws mostly from the second of the three general chronological frameworks
just summarized. Global connections have certain antecedents in earlier
centuries, but they have figured as a pervasive, major aspect of social life
mainly since the middle of the twentieth century. Various indicators are
presented in Chapter 3 to demonstrate exponential increases of globality in
recent decades. That said, exact measurement of global relations remains
difficult, inasmuch as most social data (trade and investment flows, political
participation, recreational activities, and so on) are collected in relation to
country and other territorial units. We lack sufficient global statistics.

Further debates concerning the historical trajectory of globalization relate
to its future course. According to some accounts the twenty-first century will
experience a continuation - if not a further acceleration - of current high rates
of globalization. A second perspective suggests that globalization will slow or
stop once it reaches a certain plateau. A third forecast regards globalization
as a cyclical trend, so that the recent phase of rising global relations is trans¬
ient and will be succeeded by another phase of decline (Rugman, 2001;
James, 2001). A fourth prediction anticipates a future of de-globalization as
a consequence of nationalist and localist opposition. The analysis presented
in this book expects further globalization for the foreseeable future, although
policy choices will substantially affect the rates and directions of that expan¬
sion.


What drives globalization?

As with questions of definition, scale and chronology, no consensus exists in
respect of the forces that propel globalization. In fact, most studies of the
subject have largely ducked questions of explanation. Their descriptions,
measurements, evaluations and prescriptions regarding globalization have
not been rooted in an explicit theory. The present book attempts to avoid this
shortcoming by laying out an explanatory framework in its fourth chapter.

Even though most explorations of globalization have left their theoretical
perspective implicit, a broad distinction can be discerned between idealist and



Globalization Debates 21


materialist approaches. Methodologically idealist accounts have regarded
globalization as a product of mental forces such as imagination, invention,
metaphor, identity and ideology. Examples of theories that tend towards
idealism include social constructivism, postmodernism and postcolonialism.
In contrast, methodological materialists have treated globalization as a result
of concrete forces such as nature, production, technology, laws and institu¬
tions. Examples of theories that tend towards materialism include liberalism,
political realism, Marxism, and social ecology. In contrast to both idealism
and materialism, the eclectic approach adopted in this book treats both
concrete and mental circumstances as important drivers and shapers of glob¬
alization. Hence, as elaborated in Chapter 4, and as reflected in the chapter
themes of Part II, the analysis assigns causal significance to matters of identity
and knowledge as well as to matters of production and governance. Indeed,
the ideational and material aspects of globalization are held to be co-deter¬
mining, such that each significantly moulds the other.

Cutting across the idealist-materialist divide, another key point of theo¬
retical debate pits individualist against structuralist understandings of glob¬
alization. Methodologically individualist arguments regard globalization as
an outcome of decisions made by social actors (such as businesspeople, citi¬
zens, officials and politicians). In contrast, methodologically structuralist
perspectives treat globalization as a product of forces embedded in the social
order (like capitalism, the states system, nationalism, rationalism, and so on).
Thus theoretical debates about globalization replay age-old disputes in social
enquiry between voluntarists and determinists over the degree to which
agency (read, people’s choices) shapes history. On this core methodological
point the present account takes what some have called a ‘structurationist’
position, where structure and agency are mutually causative (Giddens, 1984;
Scholte, 1993: ch 7). Hence the book is filled with references both to actor
decisions (especially in Part III) and to deeper social forces (especially in Part
II), as well as to the links between them.

A third broad methodological problem for globalization studies concerns
the relationship between the analyst and the analysed. On the one hand,
following the presumptions of ‘social science’, many authors take a positivist
position that academic investigations stand apart from, and need not have
impact upon, the social reality that they study. From this methodologically
objectivist position, researchers on globalization can treat the knowledge that
they produce as politically neutral. On the other hand, methodological
subjectivists (like some radical postmodernists) argue that knowledge
emanates entirely from the experience of the person who constructs it. These
ultra-relativists may also maintain that all opinions have equal merits, with
no scope for moral judgements between the contending positions. On the
objectivist-subjectivist spectrum, as in the idealist-materialist and the
agent-structure debates, the present book takes a middle perspective, with a



22 Framework of Analysis


supposition that knowledge and other aspects of reality form a duality of reci¬
procal causation. In other words, an understanding of globalization reflects
the social conditions that surround its construction; and at the same time that
understanding reverberates back into and helps to shape those wider concrete
circumstances. Thus academic knowledge of globalization not only has intel¬
lectual significance, but political consequence as well. Adopting this assump¬
tion of a mutual determination between theory and practice, the book makes
no effort to skirt normative issues and policy challenges. On the contrary,
explicit attention is given throughout to thinking through the political impli¬
cations of the arguments presented.

Needless to say, the questions of theory just addressed - like those of defin¬
ition, measurement and periodization - require far more elaboration than is
given above. All of these matters are therefore treated at greater length in later
chapters of Part I. The purpose in this opening chapter is merely to identify
crucial issues of starting points that any account of globalization needs to
address.


Continuity or change?

Along with arguments over definition, scale, periodization and explanation,
discussions of globalization have tended in good part to be debates about
change in contemporary society. Many people have shared the intuition,
articulated here by the sociologist Anthony Giddens, that ‘the emergence of
globalized orders means that the world we live “in” is different from that of
previous ages’ (1991: 225; also Burbach and Robinson, 1999; Giddens,
2002). Accepting Philadelphia’s Liberty Medal in 1994, Prague’s playwright-
politician Vaclav Havel suggested that, whereas previously war provided the
chief stimulus to social transformation, now forces of change emanate mainly
from globalization. Countless other social commentators have also been
tempted at one or the other moment to issue a similar sweeping pronounce¬
ment about the world-historical significance of contemporary globalization.

Yet what, more specifically, is the character of social change in the context
of current globalization? Indeed, has increased global-ness in contemporary
life significantly reshaped the primary structures of social relations? Is there
anything veritably new in this purported ‘new world order’? Or has global¬
ization merely generated superficial shifts (that is, at the level of objects, insti¬
tutions, perceptions, etc.) while leaving the underlying social framework
intact?

As intimated above, the approach adopted in this book regards social
organization as having five interrelated primary aspects: that is, related to
geography, production, governance, identity and knowledge. From this
perspective, globalization would bring about social transformation to the



Globalization Debates 23


extent that this trend in geography has provoked changes in the prevailing
modes of economy, regulation, social psychology and culture. As the follow¬
ing paragraphs indicate, analysts have developed widely varying assessments
of the type and extent of social change in each of these four areas.


Production

In respect of economy, some research has linked globalization to a full-scale
transformation of the mode of production, while other accounts have only
seen continuity. On the ‘all-change’ side of this argument, many writers in
business studies have claimed that global markets, global competition and
global management have fundamentally reshaped the visions, organization
and behaviour of firms (Porter, 1990; Pucik et al., 1992; Bleeke and Ernst,
1993; Taylor and Weber, 1996; Bartlett and Ghoshal, 1998). Countless
authors have also stressed the relationship between globalization and tech¬
nological revolutions in transport, communications and data processing.
These developments have changed what is produced and how it is produced.
Many observers have in this light characterized the global economy as an
information, knowledge, postindustrial, network or service economy (Bell,
1973; Katz, 1988; Carnoy et al., 1993; Castells, 1989, 1996-7; Bryson and
Daniels, 1998; Neef, 1998; Shapiro and Varian, 1999). With a grand sweep,
Alvin and Heidi Toffler have affirmed that human history has entered a ‘third
wave’ of knowledge society after the ‘first wave’ of peasant life and the
‘second wave’ of industrial civilization (Toffler, 1980; Toffler and Toffler,
1994). Certain commentators have furthermore associated expanding global
relations with a decline or even demise of capitalism. Thus some accounts
have linked globalization with ‘late capitalism’ (intimating that this mode of
production is nearing termination) or a ‘postcapitalist society’ (suggesting
that the world has already moved beyond capitalism) (lameson, 1991;
Drucker, 1993).

These affirmations of structural change in the economy have provoked
equally strong counterclaims of continuity in the general mode of production.
For example, some analysts have insisted on the persistent centrality of manu¬
facturing industry in a global economy (Cohen and Zysman, 1987). More
broadly, Marxists and others have highlighted the underlying persistence of
capitalism in contemporary globalization (Magdoff, 1992; Chesnaid, 1994;
S. Amin, 1996, 1997; Marshall, 1996; Went, 1996, 2000; Burbach et al.,
1997; McChesney etal., 1998; Berger et al., 1998-9).

A third general line of argument has regarded the relationship between
globalization and capitalism as one of change-within-continuity. Such
accounts argue that the spread of global relations has provoked shifts (or, to
invoke the jargon, a ‘restructuring’) in the ways that surplus accumulation
occurs. For example, globalization may have brought a new world division of



24 Framework of Analysis


labour, a rise of regionalism, greater concentration of production in giant
corporations, more accumulation through consumerism and finance capital,
and a move from so-called ‘Fordist’ to ‘post-Fordist’ regimes for the control
of labour. However, behind these changes capitalism remains firmly in place
as the underlying mode of production.

As is elaborated in Chapter 5, the present account follows the third broad
approach. Accelerated large-scale globalization in contemporary history has
been closely associated with several important turns in the development of
capitalism, but globalization has by no means been the midwife of a post¬
capitalist society. On the contrary, thus far globalization has left capitalism
as entrenched as ever, if not more so, to the point that one could even speak
of an onset of ‘hypercapitalism’.


Governance

Along with questions of economy, much discussion of globalization and
social change has focused on issues of governance (Prakash and Hart, 1999;
Nye and Donahue, 2000; Keohane, 2001; Held and McGrew, 2002; Kahler
and Lake, 2003). Has the development of a more global world brought
fundamental changes in the ways that social life is regulated? Is contemporary
society acquiring a new mode of governance because of globalization?

Many debates on globalization and governance have concerned the nature
and fate of the state. For example, various commentators have affirmed that
contemporary globalization has deprived the state of sovereignty (Camilleri
and Falk, 1992; Wriston, 1992; Sassen, 1997). More broadly, a number of
analysts have linked the growth of global relations to ‘the diminished nation-
state’, ‘the decline of the nation-state’, and ‘the retreat of the state’ (Cable,
1995; Schmidt, 1995; Strange, 1996). Other writers have gone still further to
connect globalization with ‘a crisis of the nation-state’, ‘the obsolescence of
the state’, and ‘the extinction of nation-states’ (Horsman and Marshall,
1994; Dunn, 1995; Ohmae, 1995; Khan, 1996; Bauman, 1998: ch 4;
Hudson, 1999; Bamyeh, 2000). On these accounts, states are helpless victims
of globalization.

Such assertions have triggered a host of rebuttals. For example, certain
authors insist that globalization has done nothing to undermine sovereign state¬
hood (Thomson and Krasner, 1989; Krasner, 1993). According to this view a
state could, if it wished, extricate itself from global relations that would other¬
wise limit its autonomy. Similar arguments have affirmed that global flows (in
communications, ecology, etc.) do not necessarily undermine the state and
indeed may in some cases strengthen it (Mann, 1997). Likewise, these perspec¬
tives maintain that the state retains substantial capacities to govern global
economic activities (Boyer and Drache, 1996; Weiss, 1998; Hirst and
Thompson, 1999). Indeed, say the continuity theorists, states (especially the



Globalization Debates 25


major states) remain the prime regulatory force even in that purportedly most
globalized of economic sectors, namely finance (Kapstein, 1994; Pauly, 1997;
Helleiner, 1998,1999).

A third general strand in debates about globalization and governance - an
approach that is also developed in Chapter 6 of this book - focuses less on the
viability of the state per se and more on shifts in its character. These argu¬
ments hold that, while contemporary globalization has not threatened the
existence of the state, the process has involved changes in its forms and func¬
tions (Jessop, 1994; Camilleri et al., 1995; Panitch, 1996; Evans, 1997;
Scholte, 1997; Shaw, 1997). For example, say such authors, sovereignty has
acquired substantially different meanings and dynamics in a globalizing
world (Lapidoth, 1992; Spruyt, 1994; Gelber, 1997; Schrijver, 1997; Clark,
1999: ch 4). For his part, Bob Jessop has discerned a shift under the pressures
of global capital from a Keynesian welfare state to what he calls a
‘Schumpeterian workfare state’ that subordinates social policy to the
demands of labour market flexibility and the constraints of international
competition (1993: 9). Meanwhile Philip Cerny has described a ‘competition
state’ that takes measures (in exchange-rate, fiscal, monetary, regulatory and
trade policies) to attract and retain footloose global capital (1990:ch8;1997;
also Bratton et al., 1996).

Various accounts of the mode of governance in a globalizing world -
including the present book - have also described a more general structural
shift away from the statist so-called ‘Westphalian system’ that held sway
prior to the late twentieth century (Rosenau and Czempiel, 1992; Rosenau,
1997; Herod etal., 1998; Held etal., 1999; Scholte, 2001; Keane, 2003). For
these analysts, governance under conditions of large-scale globalization has
come to involve more than states. Authority has become increasingly ‘multi¬
level’ or ‘multi-scalar’ across substate (municipal and provincial) bodies and
suprastate (macro-regional and transworld) agencies as well as state organs.
In addition, various private sector and civil society actors have taken on regu¬
latory roles. On this line of argument states survive under globalization, but
they are no longer the sole - and in some cases not even the principal - site of
governance.


Identity

Another issue of globalization and social change that has provoked consider¬
able controversy relates to identity and associated constructions of social
bonds. In academic circles, these debates have unfolded mainly in anthropo¬
logical and sociological writings (Featherstone, 1990; King, 1991; Mlinar,
1992; Robertson, 1992; Friedman, 1994; Appadurai, 1996; Cvetkovich and
Kellner, 1997; Jameson and Miyoshi, 1998; Meyer and Geschiere, 1998;
Tomlinson, 1999). However, much popular speculation has also enquired



26 Framework of Analysis


whether globalization makes people more similar or more different. Does
globalization encourage homogenization or heterogenization of identities?

On the one hand, many commentators (particularly those who conceive of
globalization in terms of liberalization or westernization) have argued that
the process brings about a worldwide ‘cultural synchronization’ (Hamelink,
1983: 3; also Tomlinson, 1995; Norberg-Hodge, 1999b; Warmer, 2003). In
the words of Theodore Levitt, an early champion of global markets, ‘every¬
where everything gets more and more like everything else as the world’s pref¬
erence structure is relentlessly homogenized’ (1983: 93). For these analysts,
globalization has harmonized and unified, often crushing traditional ways of
life when they have deviated from the dominant western pattern. As a result,
cultural diversity has had its day. Globalization is diffusing a single world
culture centred on consumerism, mass media, Americana, and the English
language. Depending on one’s perspective, this homogenization entails either
progressive universalism or oppressive imperialism.

In contrast, other diagnoses - including the analysis elaborated in Chapter
7 of this book - have linked globalization with enduring or even increased
cultural diversity (Appadurai, 1990; Hannerz, 1992: ch 7; Cable, 1994). For
one thing, such accounts emphasize, global communications, markets, etc.
are often adapted to fit diverse local contexts. Through so-called ^localiza¬
tion’, global news reports, global products, global social movements and the
like take different forms and make different impacts depending on local
particularities (Robertson, 1995; K. R. Cox, 1997). Likewise, large-scale
globalization has not kept countless people from continuing to embrace
national differences (Smith, 1990; Foster, 1991; Buell, 1994). Indeed, many
groups have championed national, religious and other particularistic identi¬
ties as a reaction to and defence against a universalizing ‘McWorld’ (Barber,
1996). For followers of Samuel Huntington, identity politics under contem¬
porary globalization is marked by a clash of civilizations: Confucian, Eastern
Orthodox, Hindu, Islamic, Judaeo-Christian, etc. (Huntington, 1993,1996).
Others argue that globalization has promoted fragmentation, with a flour¬
ishing of substate identities like ethno-nationalism and indigenous peoples’
movements (Halperin and Scheffer, 1992; Wilmer, 1993; Connor, 1994;
Brysk, 2000). In addition, some accounts suggest that global relations have
increased opportunities for the development of nonterritorial identities and
solidarities, for example, connected to class, gender, race, religion and sexual
orientation.

A further tendency in debates about globalization and identity has high¬
lighted the rise of more intercultural constructions of being and belonging.
From this perspective, also developed in Chapter 7, globalization has encour¬
aged countless new cultural combinations and blurred distinctions between
nations and between civilizations. Various authors have in this respect asso¬
ciated globalization with ‘creolization’ and ‘hybridization’ (Hannerz, 1987;



Globalization Debates 27


Nederveen Pieterse, 1995; Hedetoft and Hjort, 2002). A number of comment¬
ators have moreover suggested that these tendencies have created a need for
alternative forms and ethics of identity politics, away from the old communi¬
tarian habits of dualistic ‘us-them’ oppositions between neatly defined and
separated groups (Blaney and Inayatullah, 1994; Shapiro, 1994; Scholte,
1996,1999; Shapiro and Alker, 1996; Linklater, 1998).


Knowledge

Although most debates about globalization and social change have centred
on questions of production, governance and identity, it is possible also to
reflect on the implications of a more global world for structures of know¬
ledge. Have dominant modes of understanding shifted as society has acquired
more global qualities? Does globalization generate fundamentally different
ontologies (notions of reality), epistemologies (conceptions of knowledge),
and methodologies (ways of constructing knowledge)?

Most accounts of globalization have been silent on its consequences for
knowledge frameworks. Indeed, many researchers on globalization have
apparently not regarded structures of knowledge as an important part of their
study. Implicitly these analyses have thereby suggested that no significant
changes have unfolded in this area.

However, some commentators have explored questions of knowledge and
suggest that globalization has promoted shifts in the ways that people
comprehend their situation. In terms of ontology, for example, certain
authors have associated globalization with basic changes in understandings
of space and time (Robertson, 1992). In terms of epistemology, various argu¬
ments have linked globalization with contemporary trends of religious
revivalism (Robertson and Chirico, 1985). In terms of methodology, some
scholars have regarded globalization as an occasion to depart from disci¬
plinary divisions and other established academic conventions (Breton and
Lambert, 2003; Scholte, 2004c).

The present book raises these issues in Chapter 8 and concludes that
contemporary globalization has in certain respects encouraged challenges to
the prevailing rationalist framework of knowledge. As a result, even staunch
defenders of rationalism have tended to become more reflexive about their
mode of understanding. However, this more self-critical awareness has by no
means displaced rationalism as the predominant knowledge structure in
today’s world.

Systemic transformation?

The preceding survey makes it plain that no easy answers are available to
questions of globalization and social change. Do global economics reproduce



28 Framework of Analysis


capitalism or introduce postcapitalist modes of production? Do global poli¬
tics perpetuate statism or create poststatist modes of governance? Does
global culture reinforce nationalism or advance alternative frameworks of
identity? In terms of knowledge, does globalization sustain rationalism or
promote new frameworks of understanding?

Putting together various observations concerning globalization and social
change, can one conclude that the process carries epochal significance? Does
a more global world entail a fundamentally different kind of society? Is
contemporary globalization propelling a systemic transition of the sort that
in earlier history bridged feudalism and capitalism, or the medieval and the
modern? Again, opinions are divided.

For some analysts, contemporary globalization entails the dawn of a post¬
modern era. For example, the geographer David Harvey has applied the label
‘postmodernity’ to global capitalism and associated cultural changes
(Harvey, 1989). For his part, the sociologist Martin Albrow has declared that
‘the Global Age’ lies beyond modernity, because globality allegedly supplants
rationality and the nation-state as the primary bases of social organization
(Albrow, 1996). Meanwhile other theorists have identified postmodernity as
a global world of ‘informationalized’, ‘mediatized’, ‘hyperreal’, ‘virtual’,
‘simulated’ social experiences in which people lose a stable sense of identity
and knowledge (Axford, 1995; Luke, 1995; O Tuathail, 1996: ch 7; Peterson,
2003).

In contrast to such transformation theses, other accounts have seen only
continuities of modernity in contemporary globalization. From such perspec¬
tives, a more global world exhibits the same basic modern attributes as
preceding social relations. Globality is just as capitalist, just as industrialist,
just as bureaucratist, just as militarist, just as nationalist, just as individualist,
just as rationalist as earlier forms of modernity. Indeed, some analysts have
regarded globalization as an extension of modernization. Such authors claim
that, by spreading and deepening the hold of modern social structures across
the world, globalization is generating ‘high’, ‘advanced’, ‘radical’ or ‘super’
modernity (Giddens, 1990, 1991; Auge, 1992; Spybey, 1996). In a variation
on this theme, Ulrich Beck has associated globalization with a ‘new’ and
‘reflexive’ modernity, a ‘modernization of modernization’ that replaces
industrial society with a risk society wrought by insecurities (Beck, 1986,
1997).

The present book’s account of globalization and social change falls some¬
where between a high-modernity argument and a postmodernity thesis.
From the perspective adopted in Part II, there is an intimate but not neces¬
sary connection between globality and modernity. The main structural
impetuses to contemporary intense globalization have indeed come from
modern social patterns like capitalist production, bureaucratic governance,
communitarian identity, and rationalist knowledge. Likewise, for the



Globalization Debates 29


moment most historical shifts associated with globalization can be under¬
stood as changes within continuities of modernity: hypercapitalism is still
capitalist; polycentric governance is still bureaucratic; heterogeneous identi¬
ties still tend to be formed through communitarian ‘us-them’ dynamics;
reflexive rationalism is still rationalist. That said, however, transplanetary
and supraterritorial connectivity could conceivably also be generated by and
sustained with non-modern social forces. Thus, even if Giddens is right that
‘modernity is inherently globalizing’ (1990: 63, 177), it does not follow that
only modernity can evoke globalization or that globalization is inherently
modernizing. Other globalizations (including postmodern globalizations)
are possible, as various alternative social practices within current globaliza¬
tion already intimate.


Liberation or shackles?

Next to disputes over starting premises and arguments about social change, a
third cluster of globalization debates highlight normative issues. In a word, is
globalization a good or a bad thing? Does the process enhance or degrade the
human condition? Does the trend produce a utopia or a hell? Does globaliza¬
tion take history to a peak of progress or a trough of decay?

On these matters, too, opinions have been highly divided. On the one
hand, many people have welcomed globalization as an emancipatory force.
For these enthusiasts, global relations increase efficiency, sustainability,
welfare, democracy, community, justice and peace. Globalization is a
‘win-win’ scenario where everyone in world society benefits. Against this
rosy picture, many other people have rejected what they have variously
described as ‘global pillage’, ‘global apartheid’ and ‘the global trap’ (Brecher
and Costello, 1994; Alexander, 1996; Martin and Schumann, 1996). For crit¬
ics, global relations undermine security, equality and democracy. The rest of
this section considers normative debates about globalization in more detail
under these three general headings.


Security

The first of these themes, security, encompasses various issues connected with
human experiences of safety and confidence. Does globalization encourage
protection or vulnerability, stability or uncertainty, well-being or misery,
social integration or alienation, calm or stress, hope or fear? Is a more global
world a more endangered world, objectively and/or perceptually?

Security has various dimensions: bodily safety, ecological integrity,
material welfare, cultural protection, rule of law, and more. Indeed, one
effect of contemporary globalization debates has been to broaden the security



30 Framework of Analysis


agenda in world politics beyond the military affairs of states (Booth, 1991;
Krause and Williams, 1997; Thomas and Wilkin, 1999). Yet major disagree¬
ments have reigned regarding the effects of globalization on the different
dimensions and issues of security.

The traditional focus of security has concerned peace and violence.
Analysts who link globalization with a spread of free trade and democracy
have often connected these developments to a decline in warfare. Observe,
they emphasize, that armed conflict has disappeared between states in the
more globalized parts of the world. By this account, globalization involves
the growth of international cooperation and a one-world community. On
broadly such lines, Hans-Henrik Holm and Georg Sorensen have in their
assessment of globalization described an emergence of ‘postmodern states’
for which warfare is unthinkable (1995: 204; also Shaw, 2000).

From a contrary angle, prophets of doom have forecast ‘the coming anar¬
chy’ of ‘global disorder’ (Harvey, 1995; Kaplan, 2000). From this
pessimistic perspective, globalization has bred intolerance and violence, as
manifested in ultra-nationalism, racism, religious fundamentalism,
warlordism and terrorism. Civil wars have proliferated as globalization has
weakened the state, especially in the East and the South. The technologies of
globalization (computers, missiles, satellites) have produced a barbarism of
techno-war and a voyeurism of media war. Global resource wars allegedly
loom over oil, diamonds, fresh water and more. The pains of global
economic restructuring, often pursued through policies sponsored by global
institutions like the IMF, have sparked urban riots (Walton and Seddon,
1994). At the same time global sex tourism, global trade in prostitutes, and
the mail-order marriage business have increased violence towards women
(Pettman, 1996; Skrobanek et al., 1997; Kempadoo and Doezema, 1998).
Globalization has also generated new types of illegality such as computer
crime and money laundering, as well as transworld criminal networks such
as the Sicily-based Cosa Nostra and the Colombia-based Cali cartel
(Williams, 1994; Shelley, 1995; Mittelman and Johnston, 1999; Berdal and
Serrano, 2002).

A second major security concern in globalization debates is ecological
integrity. On this subject the optimists have stressed how global conferences,
global research programmes and global environmental movements have
raised ecological awareness throughout the contemporary world
(McCormick, 1989). The technologies of globalization can - in the case of
digital computers, for example - vastly enhance environmental management.
Global laws and institutions can provide indispensable frameworks of
ecological protection and regeneration (Haas et al., 1993; Young et al.,

1996) . To take one outstanding example, global conventions and monitoring
bodies have been successfully ‘healing the sky’ from ozone depletion (Tanner,

1997) .



Globalization Debates 31


For other observers, however, globalization has entailed environmental
catastrophe. Since the 1960s a spate of Cassandras have warned of ‘the chasm
ahead’, ‘the closing circle’, and ‘global collapse’ (Peccei, 1969; Commoner,
1971; Meadows et al., 1992). A number of global ecological problems
allegedly threaten human survival. Consider exhaustion of natural resources,
excessive world population growth, nuclear holocaust, acid rain, climate
change, species extinction, HIV/AIDS, BSE (‘mad cow disease’), SARS, and
CM (genetically modified) food crops. Meanwhile global trade has taken
pollution to new heights, and global institutions like the World Bank have
engineered ecologically unsustainable ‘development’ (Rich, 1994; Reed,
1996). Worries about global ecological despoliation have lain at the heart of
Beck’s previously mentioned ‘risk society’ (Beck, 1988).

Next to bodily security and ecological security, globalization is generally
held also to have far-reaching implications for economic security. The enthu¬
siasts have emphasized the gains in economic efficiency and growth that
allegedly result when the world becomes a single open marketplace (Bergsten,
1996; Bryan and Farrell, 1996; Burtless et al., 1998: ch 2). Moreover, global
trade is said to enhance consumer satisfaction, distributing more products to
more people at lower prices. With regard to employment, global investment
creates jobs at host sites, and technological advances connected with global¬
ization reduce the burdens of human labour in many industries.
Globalization has also served as a primary engine of economic development,
particularly in the so-called ‘newly industrializing countries’ (NICs) like
Malaysia and South Korea and the so-called ‘emerging markets’ like Brazil,
Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS). Meanwhile, when disasters
strike, global communications and global organizations make possible
humanitarian relief operations with a speed and on a scale never before avail¬
able. In short, for its champions, globalization is a formula for unprecedented
material prosperity across the planet.

For the critics, however, globalization has had calamitous consequences
for economic security (Mander and Goldsmith, 1996). Global capitalism,
warns William Greider, ‘appears to be running out of control toward some
sort of abyss’ (1997: 12). The ‘mad money’ of ‘casino capitalism’ in global
financial markets threatens even the largest of fortunes (Strange, 1986,
1998). Wild fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, stock prices and other
financial values can destroy livelihoods in an instant. Global capital
outflows have brought even major national economies like Mexico, Korea,
Russia, Argentina, Brazil and Turkey to their knees in a matter of days. In
the South and the East, global finance has saddled countries large and small
with crippling debts. Concurrently, the pressures of global competition have
reduced aid flows to poor countries. ‘Globalization’ and ‘development’ are
antithetical, say the critics (Raghavan et al., 1996; McMichael, 1996a;
Thomas and Wilkin, 1997; Hoogvelt, 2001). ‘Structural adjustment’ in the



32 Framework of Analysis


face of globalization has unravelled welfare provisions for vulnerable sectors
of society (Cornia et al., 1987-8; Ghai, 1991; Chossudovsky, 1997).
Unemployment has burgeoned as countless companies relocate and ‘down¬
size’ in response to global competition. Full employment has become unreal¬
izable. Some analysts have even foreseen a ‘jobless future’ and ‘the end of
work’ (Aronowitz and DiFazio, 1994; Rifkin, 1995). As for people who
remain in waged employment, they have allegedly been caught in a ‘race to
the bottom’ of working conditions between ‘lean and mean’ global firms
(Brecher and Costello, 1994; Tilly, 1995; Kapstein, 1996). In this ‘world war’
of ‘savage capitalism’ (Robinson, 1996a: 13, 27), governments and work¬
forces do anything to maintain the ‘confidence’ of global markets.

More ideational concerns in debates about globalization and security
relate to culture. Do global circumstances make people secure in their ways of
being, understanding and communicating? On this subject the optimists have
celebrated the cultural pluralism and innovation that global relations
purportedly promote. In line with previously described claims about hetero-
genization and hybridization, these commentators have argued that global¬
ization creates space for thousands of flowers to bloom. Furthermore, the
enthusiasts maintain, global communications through jet tourism, electronic
mass media and the Internet promote greater intercultural understanding and
are laying the foundations for a veritable world community.

In contrast, other commentators have suggested that globalization under¬
mines security of identity and knowledge. From their perspective, global rela¬
tions involve cultural imperialism (cf. Tomlinson, 1991; Petras, 1993;
Golding and Harris, 1997). The new world order of globalization imposes
‘western’ and especially ‘American’ meanings that both obliterate older tradi¬
tions and restrict the development of new alternatives. The resultant loss of
cultural resources is not only tragic in its own right, but also limits the capa¬
cities of humankind to respond creatively and effectively to political, ecologi¬
cal and economic challenges.

From another angle, some analysts have affirmed that intense blending of
cultures through globalization unsettles any and all truth claims. Even the
Enlightenment vision of human progress becomes a casualty. Science is dead,
relativism reigns, intellectual security dissolves.

In sum, globalization debates are littered with polarized claims and counter¬
claims about human security. At one extreme, enthusiasts have linked
globalization to an ‘end of history’ where peace, sustainability, prosperity
and truth are assured (Fukuyama, 1992). At another extreme, alarmists have
warned of the ‘global turmoil’ of a ‘new world disorder’ (Brzezinski, 1993).
These issues are treated at greater length in Chapter 9, where the evidence on
these points is found on the whole to be rather negative. However, the fault
for these unhappy outcomes lies with the policies adopted towards contem¬
porary globalization rather than with the process as such.



Globalization Debates 33


Equality

Alongside security, social equality has been a second major focal point of
normative debates about globalization. Do people have equal opportunities
to participate in global relations; or does globalization arbitrarily bypass,
marginalize and silence much of the world’s population? Do people fairly
share the costs and the benefits of globalization; or does the process increase
maldistribution in the world? Is globalization a force for social justice or
exploitation?

Many commentaries on globalization and equality have stressed the nega¬
tive, with allegations that the process has sustained and indeed often deep¬
ened arbitrary social hierarchies. With respect to class, for example, many
have claimed that globalization has increased the advantages of already priv¬
ileged strata. Income gaps have grown in almost every country as wealthy
circles have taken the lion’s share of the material benefits from globalization.
In the words of a peasant activist in Brazil, ‘Globalization is a system where a
few get a lot and a lot get too little’ (Cervinski, 2004). At the same time, many
argue, global markets have undermined the Keynesian welfare state as a
mechanism for reducing social inequalities (Teeple, 1995; Gray, 1998;
Mishra, 1999).

Critics have also frequently alleged that globalization has perpetuated if
not heightened inequality in relations between countries (Hurrell and Woods,
1999). In these accounts, globalization is a postcolonial imperialism that has
not only reinvigorated the exploitation of the South by the North, but also
added former communist-ruled areas to the list of victims. For poor coun¬
tries, globalization allegedly means perpetual financial and related economic
crises, the immiserating effects of structural adjustment programmes
imposed by the IMF and the World Bank, further subordination in world
trade, ecological problems without economic benefits, and the cultural imperi¬
alism of global communications (Thomas and Wilkin, 1997). In the eyes of
the pessimists, globalization has frustrated hopes and expectations that
decolonization would give the South equal opportunity and self-determina¬
tion in world affairs.

Meanwhile a number of feminist analyses have linked globalization with
gender inequalities (Duggan and Dashner 1994; Eisenstein, 1998; Mies,
1998; Peterson and Runyan, 1999; Wichterich, 2000; Signs, 2001). For
example, women are said to have had less access than men to global commu¬
nications networks, global financial markets, global corporate management,
and global governance institutions. The global trade regime has allegedly had
gender-differentiated effects that can disadvantage women (Joekes and
Weston, 1994; Moon, 1995; Fontana, 2003). Women have provided the bulk
of low-paid and poorly protected labour in global service industries (‘elec¬
tronic sweatshops’) and the ‘global factories’ of export processing zones



34 Framework of Analysis


(Elson and Pearson, 1981; Fuentes and Ehrenreich, 1983; Runyan, 1996;
Pearson, 1998). At the same time the pains of global economic restructuring
(for example, reduced public services) are said to have fallen disproportion¬
ately on women (Vickers, 1991; Beneria and Feldman, 1992; Aslanbeigui et
al., 1994; Rajput and Swarup, 1994; Sparr, 1994; Marchand and Runyan,
2000 ).

Similarly, global relations have, by some claims, perpetuated and intensi¬
fied racial inequalities. Like women, people of colour have, through what
some have termed ‘global apartheid’, faced structural barriers to access
global realms of travel, communications, organization, finance and markets
(Falk, 1993; Mazrui, 1994; Richmond, 1994). Several critics have suggested
- implicitly or explicitly - that global agencies like the IMF and the World
Bank have harboured institutional racism (Budhoo, 1990: 7, 48-9; Rich,
1994: 246-9). Meanwhile declining economic security in the North as a
result of globalization has purportedly encouraged a growth of racial intoler¬
ance in society at large. Racism has also been quite plain in immigration
controls against people of colour in the so-called ‘open’ world economy
(Alexander, 1996: 181-3, 253). More subtle subordination has occurred
through the global mass media’s usual portrayal of black people ‘either as
victims of disaster or as exotic extras’ (Alexander, 1996: 252).

Other commentators have highlighted still further inequalities in global¬
ization with respect to rural peoples (Flora, 1990; McMichael, 1996b). The
countryside has allegedly benefited far less from global flows than towns, as
globalization perpetuates an urban bias in development paradigms.
Meanwhile the ‘global agro-food system’ is said to have promoted big indus¬
trial and finance capital in the countryside at the expense of smallholder
livelihoods and food security (LeHeron, 1993; McMichael, 1993, 1994;
Whatmore, 1994). In particular, the ongoing transformation of the world
economy has purportedly accelerated a process of ‘global depeasantization’
whereby dispossessed rural populations have poured into sprawling urban
slums (Araghi, 1995).

While many critics have regarded globalization as a catastrophe for social
equality, others have made more positive diagnoses. For example, enthusiasts
have argued that everyone is - or will be - better off in a global economy.
These optimists often point to examples of Chile, China, Hungary, Kuwait
and Uganda. Many people may struggle during the transition to a more glob¬
alized world, and some classes and countries may gain more, or sooner, than
others. However, by following the right policies, in the long run substantial
benefits will accrue to all. Already, the optimists affirm, global companies
and industries have offered women more opportunities to enter paid employ¬
ment, while global governance agencies and global social movements have
helped to give gender equity issues a higher profile. Global regimes have also
done much to advance principles of racial equality and human rights more



Globalization Debates 35


generally, including for children and disabled persons. Global governance
institutions like the World Bank and global nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) like Oxfam are, say some, addressing problems of rural development
more effectively than state programmes have ever done.

So does globalization favour the privileged and exploit the vulnerable? Or
does globalization open new avenues to greater equality? Chapter 10 assesses
a range of available evidence and concludes that, while globalization offers
important possibilities to create greater social equality, other significant
impacts to date have been negative. Again, however, these downsides have
flowed from policy choices rather than from globalization per se.


Democracy

A third area in the spotlight of contemporary normative debates about glob¬
alization is democracy (McGrew, 1997b; Holden, 2000). What does ‘becom¬
ing global’ imply for ‘rule by the people’? Does globalization enhance or
undermine the public’s awareness of, involvement in, and control over the
decisions that shape its destiny? Does globalization widen or restrict debate
of public affairs? How does globalization affect participation, transparency
and accountability in governance processes?

Many commentators have celebrated globalization as an occasion of
unprecedented democratization. Following the end of the Cold War, liberal
democracy has spread to more states than ever (Huntington, 1991; Shin,
1994; Diamond and Plattner, 1996). The military are out in Latin America
and Asia. Apartheid is over in South Africa. The wall is down in Europe.
Multiparty politics, ‘free and fair’ elections to representative institutions, and
legal guarantees of civil rights have become the worldwide norm for national
government. Global regulatory institutions and global civil society have
greatly promoted human rights and norms of so-called ‘good governance’.
The global mass media have encouraged democracy activists from China to
Nigeria, Georgia to Chile.

Many analysts have also championed purported democratizing impacts of
the technologies of globalization (Abramson et al., 1988; Rheingold, 1993;
Budge, 1996; Hill and Hughes, 1998). With particular exuberance, Walter
Wriston has enthused that ‘the information age is rapidly giving power to the
people in parts of the world and in a way that only a few years ago seemed
impossible’ (1992: 170-1). Electronic communications have given citizens
access to unprecedented amounts of information at unprecedented speeds.
Telephone, email, radio and television have allowed citizens to relay their
views to governing authorities as never before. Electronic communications
have also enabled civil society activists across the planet to exchange views
and coordinate strategies in global democratic campaigns for progressive
social change (Frederick, 1993; Lee, 1996; Harcourt, 1999).



36 Framework of Analysis


However, against this applause, sceptics have painted globalization as
antithetical to democracy (Gill, 1996; Robinson, 1996a: 20-1; Klein, 2000;
Hertz, 2001). Various authors have associated this new world order with
‘low-intensity democracy’ and ‘polyarchy’ where a narrow elite holds control
(Gills et ai, 1993; Robinson, 1996b). In apocalyptic terms, Claude Ake has
described a ‘deadly threat’ of globalization that irreversibly shrinks democra¬
tic space and renders political participation irrelevant (1999: 179-80).

In particular, many critics have highlighted the alleged inadequacy in a
globalizing world of democracy through the state. Of course, some objectors
have rejected the principle that the state can ever be a suitable vehicle for
democratic self-rule. For these dissenters, formal democracy of the ballot box
is a cruel veneer for social injustice. What use, they ask, are referenda and
multiparty elections organized by the state if these exercises do nothing to end
class inequities, North-South gaps, gender hierarchies, and the subordina¬
tion of minorities? For these critics, the modern state has never been democ¬
ratic, and globalization has merely brought these intrinsic failings into
sharper focus.

Other analysts have maintained that, while the state was an important
agent of the popular will in an earlier era, forces of globalization have criti¬
cally undermined the democratic capacities of country governments
(Connolly, 1991; Held and McGrew, 1993; McGrew, 1997b). For example,
say these commentators, states cannot tame the tyranny of global corpora¬
tions (Korten, 1995). Global financial markets, too, have often constrained
the possibilities for democratization through the state (Armijo, 1999). In
addition, states - particularly small states - cannot ensure democracy for
their citizens in respect of global governance bodies like the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the WTO. On this line of argument, terri¬
torial mechanisms like the state cannot - certainly by themselves - secure
democratic governance of supraterritorial phenomena such as global
communications and global ecological problems. Ironically, then, unprece¬
dented numbers of states have adopted liberal democracy at the very moment
when statist democracy has passed its historical sell-by date.

On notions of electronic democracy, sceptics have emphasized a digital
divide whereby only a minority of the world’s population - and a highly priv¬
ileged minority at that-has had access to the Internet (Loader, 1998). As for
home voting via interactive television, this practice would ‘privatize politics
and replace deliberative debate in public with the unconsidered instant
expressions of private prejudices’ (Barber, 1996: 270). Meanwhile new
information and communications technologies supply authorities with
unprecedented capacities for intrusive surveillance and the manipulation of
public opinion.

Yet the critics have not been only negative. Many of them have also
regarded globalization optimistically as an opportunity to reconstruct



Globalization Debates 37


democracy. The resultant new frameworks might well give voice and respond
to public needs and wants better than state-centric mechanisms of old were
ever able to do. For example, some commentators have welcomed globaliza¬
tion as a force that facilitates devolution and the principle of subsidiarity,
whereby governing power is always located at the closest possible point to the
citizen. Other reformers have stressed the need for a democratization of
governance at the regional level, for instance, in relation to the European
Union (EU). Meanwhile other analysts have advanced ideas of ‘cosmopolitan
democracy’ through transworld institutions (Held, 1995a,b; Archibugi etal.,
1998). A number of specific proposals have suggested the creation in the
United Nations of a People’s Assembly of citizen representatives alongside
the General Assembly of states. In other ways, too, promoters of innovation
in democratic practice have endorsed the development of civil society as a
‘multilateralism from below’ that pursues the public good (Falk, 1992,1995;
Smith and Guarnizo, 1998; Smouts, 1999; Kaldor, 2003). Likewise, a
number of political theorists have regarded globalization as a stimulus to
develop new and more effective modes of citizenship (Steenbergen, 1994;
Lacarrieu and Raggio, 1997; Castles and Davidson, 2000; Vandenberg,
2000). In short, for these authors democracy is historically contingent, and
globalization by altering the contours of governance demands that democ¬
racy be refashioned anew.

As with issues of security and equality, then, considerable discord exists
concerning the implications of globalization for democracy. For some a more
global world is a blessing for collective self-determination, while for others it
is a bane. The relative merits of the various arguments are evaluated in
Chapter 11, where it is concluded that contemporary globalization has
indeed generated very serious democratic deficits, but also significant oppor¬
tunities to redress them.


What to do?

On top of disagreeing about starting premises, assessments of social change,
and normative evaluations, people have also taken radically different posi¬
tions concerning the policy courses that should be adopted towards global¬
ization. Almost no one argues that all is well in the current globalizing world,
but commentators have advanced widely varying prescriptions to improve
the situation (Higgott, 2000).

Four broad lines of policy response to contemporary globalization can be
distinguished. On the one hand, neoliberalists have championed globaliza¬
tion on a market-led path in which public authorities only facilitate and in no
way interfere with the dynamics of demand and supply. In contrast, rejec-
tionists have advocated ‘de-globalization’ and return to a pre-global status



38 Framework of Analysis


quo ante. A third approach, reformism, has argued that globalization should
be deliberately steered with public policies, including substantially increased
global governance. Finally, transformist strategies have variously drawn on
anarchist, socialist, postmodernist and other radical visions to advocate a
revolutionary globalization that transcends currently prevailing social struc¬
tures like capitalism or rationalism.


Neoliberalism

As the name suggests, ‘neo’-liberalism advances a new line on an old story. It
draws on several centuries of modern thought dating back to treatises by the
likes of John Locke and Adam Smith. Neoliberalism builds on the laissez-
faire convictions of classical liberalism, which promise that unconstrained
market forces will ‘naturally’ bring prosperity, liberty, democracy and peace
to society. In particular, liberal trade theorists have argued since the seven¬
teenth century that state borders should not form an artificial barrier (with
tariffs and other officially imposed restrictions) to the efficient allocation of
resources in the world economy.

Early intellectual exponents of neoliberalism between the 1930s and the
1960s included Friedrich von Hayek and Milton Friedman. Since the 1970s
neoliberalists have revived classical liberal arguments for ‘free markets’ in
relation to an economy that is becoming increasingly global (Gill, 1995a;
Chomsky, 1998; Gore, 2000; Went, 2000; Gamble, 2001; Hovden and
Keene, 2002; Scholte, 2003; Steger, 2004, 2005). According to neoliberalist
tenets, globalization should be approached with large-scale removal of offic¬
ial interventions in the market, especially through measures of liberalization,
deregulation, privatization and fiscal constraint. This policy package has
often been termed ‘the Washington Consensus’, as the economist John
Williamson dubbed the prevailing view of the US Government and the
Washington-based global economic institutions in the 1980s (Williamson,
1990,1997).

In a word, neoliberalists have reacted against the statist strategies of
economic management that prevailed (whether in a socialist, a fascist or a
welfarist form) across the world between the 1930s and the 1970s. With
liberalization, neoliberalists have advocated the abolition of most state-
imposed limitations on movements between countries of money, goods,
services and capital. Logically, neoliberalism should also promote unre¬
stricted cross-border movements of labour, but in practice its proponents
have rarely pressed this point. With deregulation, neoliberalists have called
for the removal of various state controls, for example, on prices, wages and
foreign exchange rates. With privatization, neoliberalists have urged a major
contraction of state ownership of productive assets and a transfer of many
service provisions from government agencies to the private sector. And with



Globalization Debates 39


fiscal constraint, neoliberalists have demanded tight controls on government
spending in order to limit public-sector debt and reduce tax rates.

This is not to say, as some commentators have mistakenly assumed, that
neoliberalist approaches to globalization accord no role to the state and other
governance institutions. Deregulation does not mean no regulation. On the
contrary, neoliberalism recognizes the need for laws and institutions that
uphold markets and promote their efficient operation, for example, with
guarantees of property rights and contracts. Moreover, when a population is
reluctant, the implementation of a neoliberalist agenda can depend on strong
pressure from the state and/or suprastate agencies like the IMF (A. Gamble,
1994). However, in neoliberalist eyes public-sector agencies should not
attempt to direct the course of market forces in the global or any other realm.
Hence neoliberalism prescribes a shift from state interventionism towards
market-enabling governance.

Neoliberalism has generally prevailed as the reigning policy discourse for
globalization since the early 1980s. Most governments - including in parti¬
cular those of the major states - have adopted a neoliberalist orientation
toward globalization over the past quarter-century. From the side of global
institutions, agencies such as the IMF, the WTO and the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) have continually linked
globalization with liberalization. Since the 1990s UN agencies have largely
come to a neoliberalist orientation as well, albeit with greater hesitation and
qualification. Meanwhile most schemes of regionalization in the contemp¬
orary globalizing economy have focused on the liberalization of cross-border
traffic between the countries involved. Champions of neoliberalism have also
abounded in commercial circles, particularly in the financial markets and
among managers of global firms. Business associations like the International
Organization of Employers (IOE) and the World Economic Forum (WEF)
have likewise figured as bastions of neoliberalism. In the mass media, major
business-oriented newspapers and magazines like the Wall Street Journal
( WSJ) and The Economist have generally supported neoliberalist policies, as
have business and economy programmes on mainstream radio and television.
In academic quarters, conventional courses in Business Studies and
Economics have extolled the virtues of global free markets from positions at
renowned and obscure universities alike. Other researchers have promoted
neoliberalist policies through influential think tanks such as the Institute for
International Economics in Washington, DC (Bergsten, 1996).

Given this considerable hold on elite circles, neoliberalism has generally
ranked as policy orthodoxy in respect of contemporary globalization. Indeed,
neoliberalist ideas have held widespread unquestioned acceptance as
‘commonsense’. Enjoying the strongest backing in official, business, media
and academic circles, neoliberalist measures towards globalization have
usually been the easiest to endorse. Moreover, as later chapters make clear,



40 Framework of Analysis


this approach has often generously served powerful interests, particularly
those related to dominant classes and countries.

This is not to say that neoliberalist policies have been fully and consist¬
ently implemented. There have always been disconnects between ideology
and practice. In particular, many powerful state and corporate actors have
qualified or refused a ‘free markets’ approach when its adoption would
disadvantage them. For instance, as already noted, few champions of global
laissez-faire have taken the logical step of advocating unrestricted
transworld movements of labour. In addition, the European Union and the
US government have for many years obstructed efforts to liberalize trade in
agriculture, a measure that would substantially benefit many poor coun¬
tries. On these and other occasions, the practical application of neoliberal-
ist principles has revealed glaring double standards. Yet in spite of these
inconsistencies - or indeed perhaps because of them - neoliberalism has
remained the dominant policy orientation towards globalization over the
past quarter-century.

True, advocates of liberalization, deregulation, privatization and fiscal
constraint have tended to become less dogmatic since the mid-1990s. While
mainstream economists have vigorously rebutted ‘anti-globalization’
argments (Deardorff, 2003; Segerstrom, 2003; Bhagwati, 2004), many neolib-
eralists now concede that their policy instruments need to be formulated and
executed with greater regard to particular contexts than was often done in the
evangelical 1980s and early 1990s. Likewise, the ‘Augmented Washington
Consensus’ of recent years has included more measures to address corruption,
transparency, financial codes and standards, institution building, unsustain¬
able debt burdens, better timing and sequencing of capital control removal,
social safety nets, poverty reduction, corporate citizenship, civil society
consultation, and so on (Burki and Perry, 1998; Stiglitz, 1998, 2002; Coyle,
2000; CFGS, 2001; Rodrik, 2001; World Bank, 2001, 2002). Yet at its core
‘Washington Plus’ has retained the neoliberalist commitment to globalization-
by-marketization. Indeed, in this sense it is somewhat misleading to speak - as
some have done - of a ‘Post-Washington Consensus’, given that the broad
underlying strategy has remained the same (Martib, 2000).

As elaborated in Part III, this book aligns itself with critics of neoliberalism.
It judges that, although some liberalizations, deregulations, privatizations and
fiscal disciplines have enhanced efficiencies in the contemporary globalizing
economy, the magnitude of these gains has fallen far short of what is needed to
ensure prosperity for all. On the contrary, as at other times in history, ‘free
markets’ have generally directed disproportionate benefits to the already priv¬
ileged and increased the marginalization of the disadvantaged. Unconstrained
global markets have also tended to encourage greater cultural destruction,
ecological degradation and human rights abuses. ‘Post-Washington’ reforms
have certainly been an improvement on the ultra-liberalism of the 1980-95



Globalization Debates 41


period, but they do not address the inherent shortcomings of a market-led
strategy of globalization.


Rejectionism

The other three general policy approaches to globalization distinguished here
have in different ways reacted against the harmful effects of neoliberalism.
For their part, rejectionists have extrapolated from the failings of laissez-faire
globalization to conclude that any and all forms of transworld connectedness
have calamitous consequences. For these critics, globality is by its very nature
deeply and unacceptably unsafe, unjust, undemocratic and unsustainable.
Since these negative consequences are inherent in globalization, the rejection¬
ists say, the process should be avoided in whatever guise. Only with a rever¬
sion to national and local spheres can people rebuild a good society.
‘De-globalization’ is needed to recover ecological integrity, economic
welfare, cultural security, self-determination and peace (Mander and
Goldsmith, 1996; Flewison, 1999; Hines, 2000; Bello, 2004).

Rejectionist calls for de-globalization have come in diverse forms, includ¬
ing economic nationalism as well as some streams of religious revivalism and
radical environmentalism. Economic nationalists (a group that has included
some old-style socialists like the Communist Party in post-Soviet Russia) have
put the emphasis on reestablishing self-determination of countries by delink¬
ing them from global economic activities (Raghavan et al., 1996). Religious
revivalists among some Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews and Muslims
have prescribed ‘going local’ to retrieve the original beliefs and practices of
their faith. (That said, not all religious responses to globalization have taken
a rejectionist line. See, for example, Muzaffar, 1993 for a modernist Islamic
approach to globalization and Sulak, 1999 for a modernist Buddhist view.)
Meanwhile some ‘deep green’ ecologists have aimed to restore pre-modern
respect of, and harmony with, nature through self-sufficient local communi¬
ties (Norberg-Hodge, 1999a; Shuman, 2000).

Rejectionists are the veritable anti-globalizers in contemporary politics.
Confusingly, many commentators have also applied the label of ‘anti-global-
ization movement’ to reformists and transformists who seek not to reverse
globalization, but to redirect its course away from neoliberalism to alterna¬
tive paths. Such critics would more accurately be called ‘re-globalizers’ rather
than ‘de-globalizers’. Reformists and transformists are proponents of ‘alter -
globalization’ (after the French alter-mondialisation ) or ‘counter-globaliza¬
tions’ rather than ‘anti-globalization’. Only rejectionist circles are actually
against globalization per se. Even that opposition is qualified to the extent
that, paradoxically, rejectionist anti-globalizers have often relied on global
telecommunications, the Internet, air travel and transworld civil society
networks to pursue their causes.



42 Framework of Analysis


The fact that even the greatest opponents of globalization are enveloped in
it suggests the unviability of rejectionist strategies. Indeed, the present book
takes the view that the forces behind globalization are currently far too strong
to unravel the process. The (re)construction of nationalist or localist social
orders, free of global links, is therefore not practicable. As indicated in
Chapter 4, prevailing conditions with regard to capitalist development,
governance arrangements, identity politics and knowledge structures all
point decidedly towards sustained globalization for the foreseeable future.
The idea of eliminating these powerful trends is unfeasible within current
time horizons. The challenge is not to undo and abolish globalization, but to
understand and shape the process in ways that avoid the pitfalls of neoliber¬
alism.


Reformism

With the aim of building such alternative globalizations, a number of strate¬
gies have taken what can be termed a reformist approach. Like rejectionists,
reformists oppose neoliberalist globalization for inflicting major cultural,
ecological, economic, political and psychological harms. However, in
contrast to rejectionists, reformists affirm that a more global world is here to
stay, and they seek to redirect globalization more positively on non-marketist
lines.

As the name suggests, reformists hold that capitalism can be a force for
social good if it is ‘re-formed’, that is, reorganized in non-liberalist ways that
encourage economic efficiency and stability, promote equitable distribution,
limit ecological damage, avoid cultural violence, and enhance democracy. In
particular, reformists draw on social-democratic traditions such as
Keynesian economics and the welfare state. In these visions, far-reaching
proactive public policies backed by a strong and democratically controlled
governance apparatus are required to achieve a socially progressive capitalist
economy. For example, reformists have advocated controls on cross-border
movements of resources when such constraints would reduce market volatil¬
ities, social inequities and environmental costs. Reformists have also often
argued for anti-trust measures and other official controls to limit corporate
power. In addition, reformists have prescribed various statutory guarantees
of minimum standards (including basic incomes, labour protections and
environmental controls) in order to protect vulnerable circles from the
ravages of unfettered capitalism. Other reformist policies have sought
actively to promote opportunities for structurally disadvantaged social
groups like people of colour, the unemployed, small cultivators, and women.

Many reformist policies to tame global capitalism can be pursued through
the state. A number of reformists have therefore argued for a reinvigoration
of country-based social democracy to meet new global realities (Boyer and



Globalization Debates 43


Drache, 1996; Hutton, 1996; Martin and Schumann, 1996; Giddens, 1998;
Hirst and Thompson, 1999; Held, 2004). These commentators have often
expressed disappointment that purportedly social democratic governments
have not done more to reign in global capital. Cardoso and Lula in Brazil,
Blair in Britain, Schroder in Germany, and Mbeki in South Africa have, for
these critics, conceded far too much to neoliberalism.

In part, as various social democrats have recognized, these failings of
country governments arise because global capital cannot be effectively tamed
through the state alone. To be effective, a reformist strategy of globalization
also requires expanded global governance (Group of Lisbon, 1994; Carlsson
etal., 1995; Deacon, 1997; Reinicke, 1998; Cable, 1999; Falk, 1999; Kaul et
al., 1999, 2003; Brand, 2000; Nederveen Pieterse, 2000; Drache, 2001;
Simmons and de Jonge Oudraat, 2001; Nayyar, 2002; Deacon et al., 2003;
Held and Koenig-Archibugi, 2003). For example, these reformists would
argue, effective prevention of monopoly requires a global competition
authority that works alongside state and regional anti-trust schemes.
Likewise, labour standards and other social protections cannot be effectively
secured in a context of global capitalism unless enforceable transworld
conventions supplement and bolster relevant state statutes. Similarly, binding
global ecological regimes administered through a World Environment
Organization are needed as well as country and local laws. A fully-fledged
global central bank is required to establish greater stability and justice in
global financial markets. Redistributive global taxes (for example, on
foreign-exchange transactions, air travel, carbon emissions, and the profits of
transnational corporations) are needed to allocate the gains of global capital¬
ism in more socially just ways.

Of course, global social democracy must be democratic. Reformists have
therefore also urged that democracy be refashioned so that the prescribed
enlargement of global governance involves appropriate forms and levels of
public participation and public accountability. Reformist suggestions for
such a democratization of globalization have included the creation of global
parliamentary bodies, enhanced oversight of global governance by national
legislatures, revised voting formulas for global institutions, and the promo¬
tion of an energetic global civil society.

Reformist strategies have on the whole held a weaker position in the poli¬
tics of globalization than neoliberalism and rejectionism. Social-democratic
proposals to tame global capitalism have gained much less support than
‘post-Washington’ measures to improve global markets. (Note the important
difference of emphasis.) Nor have reformist visions of greater global govern¬
ance mustered the mass appeal that some economic nationalists and reli¬
gious revivalists have managed to attract for their de-globalization
campaigns. Given this generally shallow support for reformist globalization,
the strategy has to date yielded relatively few concrete results, except perhaps



44 Framework of Analysis


to push neoliberalists to greater moderation. Indeed, neoliberalist regimes
have shown considerable adeptness in coopting reformist themes (like ‘civil
society’ or ‘sustainable development’) and draining them of most social-
democratic content.

Nevertheless, reformism has had important proponents. For example,
several country governments have made pronouncements in favour of greater
global governance. In this vein French President Jacques Chirac has, in
rhetoric at least, supported the creation of an Economic and Social Security
Council in the United Nations. Meanwhile several national parliaments (for
example, in Belgium, Canada and Germany) have since 1999 passed resolu¬
tions in favour of a global tax on currency transactions. A vision of global
social democracy has also underpinned notions of ‘decent work’ developed
since 1999 at the International Labour Organization (ILO) and conceptions of
a ‘rights-based approach to development’ pursued at the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). In addition, UNDP has popularized many
global reform proposals through the Human Development Report , issued
annually since 1990. In civil society numerous activists, including some promi¬
nent participants in the World Social Forum (WSF) process, have promoted
greater global governance on social-democratic lines. In a similar vein, the
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) has advocated
‘international policies and institutions to manage the process of globalization
in the service of the needs and aspirations of people’ (ICFTU, 1998: 9).

As the tenor of the above remarks suggests, the present book is broadly
sympathetic to reformist visions of global social democracy, albeit with
several qualifications. For one thing, reformism tends to take an overly mate¬
rialist approach, offering many proposals to reshape capitalism and govern¬
ance while giving minimal attention to matters of identity and knowledge.
Indeed, reformist ideas have been mostly drawn from Western Europe, and
their proponents have generally given little thought to the intercultural nego¬
tiations that are necessary to make the strategy democratically viable in
global spheres. More broadly, too, reformists have tended not adequately to
think through the technicalities and the politics of implementing their
programmes. Finally, reformist ideas concerning global democracy have
often merely transposed models of national democracy to the global sphere,
when globalization arguably calls for more far-reaching innovations in
democratic practices.

Transform ism

A fourth category of strategies towards globalization covers policies that go
beyond reformism to advocate more fundamental social change. These
approaches treat the emergence of a more global world as an occasion to
create a thoroughly different society. Transformists do not seek, like



Globalization Debates 45


reformists, only to produce new laws and institutions that make the existing
social order work better. Rather, these advocates aim to transcend prevailing
social structures with radically new arrangements. Whereas reformists accept
primary ordering principles of contemporary life like capitalism and ration¬
alism, transformists regard these frameworks as incorrigible and look to use
globalization to build a fundamentally different society.

Like neoliberalism, rejectionism and reformism, transformist strategies
have come in various guises. For example, many in a new generation of anar¬
chists and socialists have seen contemporary globalization as a moment to
resist and transcend capitalism and associated violences (Gills, 1997; Rupert,
2000; Bircham and Charlton, 2001; Epstein, 2001; Broad, 2002; Graeber,
2002; Danaher and Marks, 2003; Kingsnorth, 2003; Notes from Nowhere,
2003; Sandbrook, 2003; Mertes, 2004; Eschle and Maiguashca, 2005; Starr,
2005). Often these radicals have dismissed as outdated the traditional social¬
ist strategy of overturning capitalism through a proletarian capture of the
state. Instead they have championed new global social movements of the
oppressed that include indigenous peoples, peasants, sexual minorities and
women as well as working classes. For their part, a number of postmodernists
have argued for radically different kinds of global identity politics and radi¬
cally new forms of global knowledge (O Tuathail, 1996; Shapiro and Alker,
1996). With a religious emphasis, certain theologians have regarded
expanded globality as a context for a post-rationalist spiritual revolution
(Rung, 1990; Rifkin, 2003).

Transformist visions of globalization have mainly been pursued outside
conventional politics: away from governments and political parties; away
from mainstream media and large publishers; away from leading universities
and academic conferences; indeed, often away from formal organizations of
any kind. Instead, transformists have often worked outside the spotlight
through loose and decentralized networks. The casual observer can therefore
readily overlook these activities.

Examples of transformist initiatives in contemporary politics of globaliza¬
tion include the grassroots peasant activists of the worldwide Via Campesina
coalition, including the media-savvy Zapatistas of Chiapas State in southern
Mexico (Bove and Dufour, 2001; Olesen, 2002). In addition, globally
oriented socialism has inspired the efforts of some alternative labour move¬
ments that work outside traditional trade union arrangements (Waterman,
1998). Students and other youth have figured prominently in transformist
groups such as Reclaim the Streets in Britain, Montreal Anti-Capitalist
Convergence in Canada, Ya Basta in Italy, and Direct Action Network in the
USA. Postmodernist politics have marked various dissident academic and
artistic circles, mainly in the OECD countries. Liberation theology has assem¬
bled followings among radical priests in the global Catholic Church, while
Hindu revivalists and Islamists have also formed transplanetary networks.



46 Framework of Analysis


On the whole, however, transformist policies toward globalization have
attracted even weaker support than reformist strategies. These visions have
taken no noteworthy hold in official governance of globalization. The
numbers of transformist activists and academics have remained small, and
the relevant grassroots movements in particular have generally suffered from
very limited resources. For the moment it seems highly unlikely that trans¬
formist campaigns can gain the upper hand in globalization politics. Even in
their present weak position, these radicals have experienced some pretty
violent suppression by official authorities.

Transformist initiatives have also had their own limitations. For example,
these visions have tended to be incompletely articulated, saying much more
about what is opposed than what is proposed. Moreover, it is not always
clear that the new worlds on offer through transformation would indeed
improve upon the limitations and failings of currently prevailing social struct¬
ures. For example, transformist movements have often struggled with their
own internal age, class, country, culture, gender and race hierarchies. White
middle-class Anglo-Saxon Protestant males (WMCASPMs) have readily
dominated movements to overcome domination, too!

In its final chapter this book adopts some caution towards transformist
strategies and draws more from reformist programmes of global social
democracy (with the qualifications noted earlier). Transformist critiques of
other approaches to globalization have the vitally important effect of stimu¬
lating searching debates of what is and creative explorations of what could
be. Flowever, transformist strategies of globalization are not sufficiently
developed either intellectually or politically to be practicable in the short or
medium term. Indeed, the achievement of global social democracy within the
next generation might provide riper ground for deeper progressive transform¬
ations in the longer run.


Conclusion

As this opening chapter has indicated - and as the summary in the box below
recapitulates - the only consensus about globalization is that it is contested.
People have held widely differing views regarding definition, scale, chrono¬
logy, explanation, impact and policy. Everyone - including each reader of this
book - has to see their way through the debates to their own understanding
and practice of globalization.

The remaining chapters return to the different contentious points surveyed
in successive sections of this opening chapter. Chapters 2 to 4 elaborate start¬
ing premises. Chapters 5 to 8 examine implications for social structures.
Chapters 9 to 11 explore impacts on the human condition. Chapter 12
considers policy options.



Globalization Debates 47


Globalization debates in summary

Starting premises

• competing definitions: internationalization or something different?

• varying measurements of scale: globalism or scepticism?

• contrasting chronologies: old or new?

• diverse explanations: materialist or idealist, individualist or structural¬
ist?

Implications for social change

• old capitalism, new capitalism or postcapitalism?

• persistent statism or poststatist governance?

• homogenization or heterogenization of identities?

• old lines or new turns in knowledge?

• extension of modernity or dawn of postmodernity?

Impacts on the human condition

• increased or decreased security?

• more or less social equality?

• greater or reduced democracy?

Policy responses

• neoliberalist reliance on market forces?

• rejectionist reliance on localism?

• reformist reliance on public policies?

• transformist reliance on social revolution?


However, before entering into that more detailed discussion, what does the
preceding review of research and policy reveal concerning the present state of
knowledge about globalization? Clearly a great deal has been pronounced on
the subject. Indeed, thanks to burgeoning studies we are today much better
placed than we were only a decade ago to make sense of globalization.
Nevertheless, our understanding of the process remains quite limited in
important respects. Although some of the literature has become conceptually
more sophisticated and empirically more rigorous, the overall level of global¬
ization debates is still disappointing. Too much discussion continues to be
couched in soundbite, overgeneralization and blatant prejudice. Too little
research breaks out of disciplinary corners to draw together the various
dimensions of globalization: cultural, ecological, economic, geographical,
historical, legal, political and psychological.

It may be hoped that this book makes some inroads on these limitations;
however, it can do little to counter another key shortcoming. As noted earlier,
the protagonists in globalization debates have been disproportionately




48 Framework of Analysis


urban, white, middle-class, Judaeo-Christian, older English-speaking men
resident in the North (especially the USA and the UK). Notable books on
globalization have appeared in Argentina (Ferrer, 1997; Seoane and Taddei,
2001), Brazil (Ianni, 1992,1996; Gomez, 2000), China (Wang Ning, 2002),
Japan (Kaneko, 1999; Inoguchi, 2001), Malaysia (Khor, 2001; Mittelman
and Othman, 2001), Poland (Aniol, 2002), Russia (Gorbachev Foundation,
2003), South Africa (Mhone and Edigheji, 2003), Thailand (Sulak, 1999) and
elsewhere. However, these works are few in number and tend to have small
circulation. As a result, many views on globalization are marginalized or
silenced altogether. Much of the debate is never heard. The present book can
alert the reader to these sidelined voices, but it cannot speak for them.



Chapter 2

Defining Globalization

Main points of this chapter

Rise of the g-word

Starting premises for definition

Redundant concepts of globalization

A way forward

Qualifications

Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• general notions of global-ness have a long history, but talk of 'globality'
(the condition) and 'globalization' (the trend) has mainly arisen since
1980

• a clear and precise definition of the global is crucial to advance both
knowledge and policy in contemporary society

• when taken to mean internationalization, liberalization, universalization
or westernization, ideas of globalization reveal little new and can have
objectionable political implications

• important new insight is provided when globalization is understood in
spatial terms as the spread of transplanetary - and in recent times more
particularly supraterritorial - connections between people

• globality in the sense of transworld connectivity is manifested across
multiple areas of social life, including communication, travel, production,
markets, money, finance, organizations, military, ecology, health, law
and consciousness

• notions of globalization as the rise of transplanetary and supraterritorial
links between people need to be carefully qualified in order to avoid
globalist excesses


Definition is not everything, but everything involves definition. Knowledge of
globalization is substantially a function of how the word is defined. Thus
every study of globalization should include a careful and critical examination
of the term itself. A muddled or misguided core concept compromises our
overall comprehension of the phenomenon. In contrast, a sharp and revealing
definition promotes insightful, interesting and empowering knowledge, an


49





50 Framework of Analysis


understanding that helps people to shape their destiny in directions of their
choosing.

Notions of globalization have grabbed many an intellectual imagination
over the past two decades. In academic and lay circles alike, many have
pursued an intuition that this concept could provide an analytical lynchpin
for understanding contemporary society. ‘Globalization’ is not the only (or
necessarily the best) entry point for such an enquiry, of course, but it has
generated a lot of provocative and sometimes highly insightful commentary
on present times.

Yet what lies in this word? What, precisely, is ‘global’ about globalization
(Maclean, 1999)? The present chapter develops a definition in five main
steps. The first section traces the rise of the vocabulary of globalization in
academic and lay thinking. The second section elaborates some general prin¬
ciples about the nature and role of definition. The third section identifies
several analytical cul-de-sacs with respect to globalization: that is, definitions
that generate redundant and in some respects also unhelpful knowledge. The
fourth section sets out a conceptualization of globalization as the spread of
transplanetary and, in present times more specifically, supraterritorial social
relations.

To stress that this analysis does not succumb to globalist exaggerations,
the fifth section adds half a dozen key qualifications to this definition. First,
territorial geography continues to be important alongside increased supra-
territoriality. Second, globality is interrelated with, rather than separate
from, other social spaces. Third, the global is not inherently contradictory to
the local. Fourth, globalization is not intrinsically a culturally homogenizing
process. Fifth, global relations have spread unevenly across regions and social
sectors, so that people experience globality to different extents. Sixth, global¬
ization is a thoroughly political matter, empowering some people and disem-
powering others.


Rise of the g-word

Although the term ‘globalization’ was not coined until the second half of the
twentieth century, it has a longer pedigree. In the English language, the noun
‘globe’ dates from the fifteenth century (derived from the Latin globus) and
began to denote a spherical representation of the earth several hundred years
ago (Robertson, 2001: 6,254; MWD, 2003). The adjective ‘global’ entered
circulation in the late seventeenth century and began to designate ‘planetary
scale’ in the late nineteenth century, in addition to its earlier meaning of
‘spherical’ ( OED , 1989: VI, 582). The verb ‘globalize’ appeared in the 1940s,
together with the term ‘globalism’ (Reiser and Davies, 1944: 212, 219). The
word ‘globalization’, as a process, first surfaced in the English language in



Defining Globalization 51


1959 and entered a dictionary two years later (Webster, 1961: 965; Schreiter,
1997). Notions of ‘globality’, as a condition, began to circulate in the 1980s
(Robertson, 1983).

The vocabulary of globalization has also spread in other languages over
the past several decades. The many examples include the terms lil ’alam in
Arabic, quanqiuhua in Chinese, mondialisation in French, gorobaruka in
Japanese, globalizatsia in Russian, globalizacion in Spanish, and kiire-
sellesjne in Turkish. Among the major world languages, only Swahili has not
(yet) acquired a globalization concept, and that exception is perhaps largely
explained by the widespread use of English in elite circles of the African coun¬
tries concerned. Yet less widely used languages, too, now incorporate words
such as globalisaatio (Finnish), bisbwavyapikaran (Nepalese), luan bo’ot
(Timorese), and so on.

Talk of ‘globalization’ has become rife among academics, journalists,
politicians, business people, advertisers and entertainers. Everyday conversa¬
tion now includes regular reference to global markets, global communica¬
tions, global conferences, global threats, the global environment, and so on.
A recent children’s T-shirt was inscribed with the words ‘Global Generation’
- and well they might be.

When new vocabulary gains such wide currency across continents,
languages and walks of life, can it just be explained away as fad? Or does the
novel word highlight a significant change in the world, where new terminol¬
ogy is needed to discuss new conditions ? For example, when Jeremy Bentham
coined the word ‘international’ in the 1780s the concept caught hold because
it resonated of a growing trend of his day, namely, the rise of nation-states
and cross-border transactions between them (Bentham, 1789: 326;
Suganami, 1978). The current proliferation of global talk also seems unlikely
to be accidental. The popularity of the terminology arguably reflects a wide¬
spread intuition that contemporary social relations are undergoing an impor¬
tant shift in character. The challenge - indeed, the urgent need - is to move
beyond the buzzword to a tight concept.

As a deliberately fashioned analytical tool, notions of the global appeared
roughly simultaneously and independently in several academic fields around
the early 1980s. In Sociology, for example, Roland Robertson began to ‘inter¬
pret globality’ in 1983 (Robertson, 1983). Concurrently, in Business Studies,
Theodore Levitt wrote of ‘the globalization of markets’ (Levitt, 1983). These
years also saw some researchers in International Relations shift their focus to
‘global interdependence’ (Rosenau, 1980; Maghroori and Ramberg, 1982).
Economists, geographers and others picked up the concept later in the 1980s.

Since the 1990s globalization has become a major academic growth indus¬
try. The problem is now explored across disciplines, across continents, across
theoretical approaches, and across the political spectrum. Countless acade¬
mics have rushed to claim the cliche of the day. The number of references to



52 Framework of Analysis


‘globali[s/z]ation’ in titles held by the United States Library of Congress multi¬
plied from 34 in 1994 to 693 in 1999 and 5,245 in early 2005 (Waters, 1995;
LoC, 1999,2005). Google hits for ‘globali[s/z]ation’ on the World Wide Web
have risen to 23.3 million as this book goes to press. A host of research insti¬
tutes, degree programmes, course modules, textbooks and websites now focus
on the problem. The recent appearance of several globalization anthologies,
the preparation of the first Encyclopedia of Globalization, and the develop¬
ment of an online ‘Globalization Compendium’ further attest to the consoli¬
dation of a new field of enquiry (Beynon and Dunkerley, 2000; Higgott and
Payne, 2000; Lechner and Boli, 2000; Robertson and White, 2002; Held and
McGrew, 2003; Michie, 2003; Global Compendium, 2005; Robertson and
Scholte, 2006). Since 2000 several new professional groups have also
emerged: Global Studies Associations in Britain and the USA; and a
Globalization Studies Network with worldwide membership. Some theorists
have even presented globalization as the focal point for an alternative para¬
digm of social enquiry (cf. Shaw, 1994,1999; Cerny, 1996; Mittelman, 2002).

Yet ideas of globalization tend to remain as elusive as they are pervasive.
We sense that the vocabulary means something - and something significant -
but we are far from sure what that something is. Anthony Giddens has
observed that ‘there are few terms that we use so frequently but which are in
fact as poorly conceptualized as globalization’ (Giddens, 1996).

Persistent ambiguity and confusion over the term has fed considerable
scepticism about ‘globaloney’, ‘global babble’, ‘glob-blah-blah’, ‘glob-yak-
yak’. One critic has pointedly dismissed the idea of lending analytical weight
to the notion of globalization as ‘folly’ (Rosenberg, 2001,2005). True, some
of these objectors have had dubious motives, such as vested interests in ortho¬
dox theory, or an intellectual laziness that resists rethinking conceptual start¬
ing points. However, other doubters have quite rightly demanded a full
conceptualization before they will treat globalization as a serious scholarly
category.


Starting premises for definition

Before addressing the challenge of tightly conceptualizing the global, it is well
to reflect on the nature and purpose of definition. The exercise of naming and
identifying things is much more than a lexicographical curiosity. Five points
deserve particular emphasis.

First, definition serves - or should serve - to advance knowledge. A defin¬
ition should pave the way to greater insight. Thus, to be maximally helpful, a
new notion like globality/globalization should be defined in a way that opens
new understanding. The word should not merely restate what can already be
known with other terminology.



Defining Globalization 53


Second, no conceptualization is normatively and politically neutral. It is
therefore necessary carefully to reflect on the priorities and power relations
that any definition reflects - and also helps to (re)produce. Different defini¬
tions of globalization may promote different values and interests. Indeed,
certain critics find that the word ‘globalization’ itself is so loaded with an
imposed alien ideological agenda that they prefer to avoid the term in schol¬
arly analysis (Grzybowski, 2004). Farsi speakers make a political statement
in their choice between the terms jahanisasi and jahanisbodan. The first
word, ‘making global’, carries connotations of a US-led imperialist project,
while the second, ‘becoming global’, carries connotations of an open process
that can be shaped in various future directions.

Third, every definition is relative to a context. Each understanding of a key
concept reflects a historical moment, a cultural setting, a geographical loca¬
tion, a social status, an individual personality and - as already noted - a
normative and political commitment. Indeed, in the details if not in the
general framework, every account of an idea is unique. Each person develops
a conception that corresponds to their particular experiences and aspirations.
No universally endorsable definition is available. To ask everyone to conform
to a single view would be to ask many people to abandon themselves. The
object of definition is not to discover one sole understanding that secures
universal acceptance, but to generate insight that can be effectively commu¬
nicated to, and debated with, others.

Fourth, no definition is definitive. Definitions of core concepts are neces¬
sary to lend clarity, focus and internal consistency to arguments. However,
knowledge is a constant process of invention and reinvention. Hence every
definition is tentative and subject to reappraisal. Definition is in motion
rather than fixed. The point of the exercise is not to end in a full stop, but to
stimulate discussion that prompts further redefinition as situations change
and (one hopes) wisdom deepens.

Fifth, the variability of definition means that each formulation should be
as clear, precise, concise, explicit, consistent and cogent as possible. With
clarity, a good definition readily captures and communicates insight. With
precision, it brings the issue at hand into sharp focus. With conciseness, it
encompasses the greatest understanding in the fewest words. With explicit¬
ness, it leaves a minimum unspoken and to the reader’s inference. With
consistency, it lends internal coherence from start to finish of an argument.
With cogency, it relates convincingly to empirical evidence and policy needs.
To be sure, no definition ever fully meets these criteria, but the better concep¬
tions come closer to the ideal.

Not everyone agrees with these starting premises, of course. For example,
some commentators accept that globalization is a vague concept and see little
point in trying to define it in a clear, specific, succinct, distinctive way. On this
relaxed approach, globalization is a malleable catchall term that can be



54 Framework of Analysis


invoked in whatever way the user finds convenient. Thus many a politician
has blamed an undefined ‘globalization’ for a variety of policy difficulties,
sometimes to divert attention from their own failures. Many a social activist
has rallied under an unspecified ‘anti-globalization’ banner, so that this
movement has encompassed enormously diverse (and sometimes strikingly
contradictory) elements. Many an author and publisher have put ‘globaliza¬
tion’ into the titles of writings that actually say very little on the subject.

While such loose approaches may be politically and commercially useful,
they are deeply unsatisfactory for serious social analysis and the policy
implications that flow from it. Definitions fundamentally shape descriptions,
explanations, evaluations, prescriptions and actions. If a definition of a core
concept is slippery, then the knowledge built upon it is likely to be similarly
shaky and, in turn, the actions pursued on the basis of that knowledge can
very well be misguided.

Unfortunately, as the next section indicates, a great deal of thinking about
globalization has not followed one or several of the above principles of defi¬
nition. However, the fact that many conceptions have gone astray does not
mean that there is no way forward with the term. On the contrary, too much
is at stake in globalization debates - both theoretically and practically - to
abandon the journey.


Redundant concepts of globalization

Much if not most existing analysis of globalization is flawed because it is
redundant. Such research does not meet the first criterion above, namely, to
generate new understanding that is not attainable with other concepts. Four
main definitions have led into this cul-de-sac: globalization as international¬
ization; globalization as liberalization; globalization as universalization; and
globalization as westernization. Arguments that only build on these concep¬
tions fail to open insights that are not available through preexistent vocabu¬
lary. Deployed on any of these four lines, ‘globalization’ provides no distinct
analytical value-added. Commentators who reject the novelty and transform¬
ative potential of globalization in contemporary history have almost invari¬
ably defined the term in one or several of these four redundant ways.
Moreover, these conceptions can also raise political objections.


Internationalization

When globalization is interpreted as internationalization, the term refers to a
growth of transactions and interdependence between countries. From this
perspective, a more global world is one where more messages, ideas,
merchandise, money, investments, pollutants and people cross borders



Defining Globalization 55


between national-state-territorial units. For certain authors, like Hirst and
Thompson, globalization is an especially intense form of internationaliza¬
tion, so that the global is a particular subset of the international (1999: 7-13).
Many other analysts are less discriminating and simply regard the words
‘global’ and ‘international’ as synonyms to be used interchangeably.

Most attempts to quantify globalization have conceived of the process
as internationalization. Thus, for example, Dani Rodrik has measured
globalization in terms of current account transactions as a proportion of
GDP (Rodrik, 2001). Similarly, globalization indexes issued by A. T.
Kearney consultants and Foreign Policy ( FP ) magazine since 2001 and by
the Centre for the Study of Globalization and Regionalization (CSGR)
since 2005 have been largely calculated with reference to amounts of
cross-border activities between countries. That is, the scores mainly relate
to FDI, international travel, membership in international organizations,
international telephone traffic, etc. Moreover, the calculations measure
and compare the indicators on a territorial basis, so that one country is
said to be more, or less, globalized than another (Kearney /FP, 2001, 2002,
2003, 2004; CSGR, 2005).

Ideas of globalization-as-internationalization are attractive insofar as they
entail a minimum of intellectual and political adjustments. Global relations
of this kind can be examined on the same ontological and methodological
grounds as international relations. Global economics can be the same sort of
enquiry as international economics. The study of global politics need not
differ substantially from traditional international politics. Global culture
would be considered equivalent to international culture. Globalization-as-
internationalization gives the comforting message that the new can be wholly
understood in terms of the familiar.

Indeed, most accounts of globalization-as-internationalization stress that
contemporary trends are replaying earlier historical scenarios. In particular,
these analyses frequently note that, in proportional terms, levels of cross-
border trade, direct investment, and permanent migration were as great or
greater in the late nineteenth century as they were a hundred years later. The
suggestion is that globalization (read greater international interdependence)
is a feature of the modern states-system and world economy that ebbs and
flows over time. So today’s social researchers can relax and carry on their
enquiries more or less as previous generations have done.

Yet these very claims of familiarity and historical repetition constitute
strong grounds for rejecting the definition of globalization-as-international-
ization. If globality is nothing other than internationality - except perhaps
larger amounts of it - then why bother with new vocabulary? No one needed
a concept of globalization to make sense of earlier experiences of greater
international interaction and interdependence, and this notion is similarly
redundant today.



56 Framework of Analysis


Ideas of globalization-as-internationalization can also be politically objec¬
tionable. They readily imply that world social relations are - and can only be
- organized in terms of country units, state governments, and national
communities. As such, the vocabulary of internationality tends to ignore,
marginalize and silence other modes of organization, governance and identity
that exist and are highly valued by, for example, indigenous peoples, region-
alists, and various kinds of cosmopolitans.


Liberalization

A second common analytical dead-end in discussions of globalization has
equated the notion with liberalization. In this case, globalization denotes a
process of removing officially imposed constraints on movements of
resources between countries in order to form an ‘open’ and ‘borderless’ world
economy. On this understanding, globalization occurs as authorities reduce
or abolish regulatory measures like trade barriers, foreign-exchange restric¬
tions, capital controls, and visa requirements.

Using this definition, the study of globalization is a debate about contem¬
porary neoliberalist macroeconomic policies. On one side of this argument,
many academics, business executives and policymakers have supported
neoliberalist prescriptions, with the promise that worldwide liberalization,
privatization, deregulation and fiscal restraint would in time bring prosper¬
ity, freedom, peace and democracy for all. On the other side, critics in what is
often called the ‘anti-globalization’ movement have opposed neoliberalist
policies, contending that a laissez-faire world economy produces greater
poverty, inequality, conflict, cultural destruction, ecological damage and
democratic deficits.

To be sure, large-scale globalization and widespread economic liberaliza¬
tion have frequently transpired concurrently in the past quarter-century. For
example, average tariff rates for non-agricultural products have fallen to
record low levels. Moreover, this wave of neoliberalism has often played a
significant (albeit not necessary) facilitating role in respect of contemporary
globalization. However, it is quite something else to conflate the two
concepts, so that globalization and liberalization become the same thing.
Furthermore, such an equation can carry the dubious - and potentially harm¬
ful - political implication that neoliberalism is the only available policy
framework for a more global world.

Indeed, on cross-examination most ‘anti-globalization’ protesters are seen
to reject neoliberalist globalization rather than globalization per se. True, some
of these critics have adopted a rejectionist, mercantilist position that advocates
‘de-globalization’ to a world of autarkic regional, national or local economies.
However, most opponents of neoliberalism have sought different approaches
to globalization - ‘alter-globalizations’ or ‘counter-globalizations’ - that might



Defining Globalization 57


better advance human security, social justice and democracy. Many in main¬
stream circles, too, have recently suggested that globalization can be rescued
with social, environmental and human rights safeguards. They have thereby
also acknowledged that neoliberalist policies are not intrinsic to globaliza¬
tion.

In any case, the language of globalization is unnecessary to rehearse argu¬
ments for and against laissez-faire economics. People have debated theories
and practices of ‘free’ markets for several centuries without invoking talk of
globalization. For example, no one needed the concept of globalization when
the international economy experienced substantial liberalization in the third
quarter of the nineteenth century (Marrison, 1998). Likewise, globalization-
as-liberalization opens no new insight today.


Universalization

A third cul-de-sac appears in analyses of globalization when the notion is
conceived as universalization. In this case, globalization is taken to describe a
process of dispersing various objects and experiences to people at all inhab¬
ited parts of the earth. On these lines, ‘global’ means ‘worldwide’ and ‘every¬
where’. Hence there is a ‘globalization’ of the Gregorian calendar, tobacco,
business suits, the state, curry dinners, bungalows, school curricula, Barbie
dolls, shotguns, and so on. Frequently, globalization-as-universalization is
assumed to entail standardization and homogenization with worldwide
cultural, economic, legal and political convergence. For example, some econ¬
omists have assessed globalization in terms of the degree to which prices for
particular goods and services become the same across countries (Bradford
and Lawrence, 2004).

Yet this third type of conception, too, opens no new and distinctive insight.
To be sure, some striking worldwide diffusion has transpired in contempor¬
ary history. Moreover, substantial cultural destruction in recent times has
appeared to lend credence to the homogenization thesis (although, as is elab¬
orated later in this chapter, the cultural dynamics of globalization are actually
more complex). However, universalization is an age-old feature of world
history. Indeed, Clive Gamble has written of ‘our global prehistory’, arguing
that the transcontinental spread of the human species - begun a million years
ago - constitutes the initial instance of globalization (1994: ix, 8-9). Various
aptly named ‘world religions’ have extended across large expanses of the
earth for centuries, and several of these faiths have held explicit universalistic
pretensions. Transoceanic trade has distributed various goods over long
distances on multiple prior occasions during the past millennium. No concept
of globalization was devised to describe universalization in earlier times, and
there is no need to create new vocabulary to analyse this old phenomenon
now either.



58 Framework of Analysis


Moreover, inasmuch as notions of globalization-as-universalization carry
misguided assumptions of globalization-as-homogenization, this definition
can have unhappy political consequences. Cultural protectionists can be led
to oppose globalization per se, when they are in fact only against one of its
possible results. Indeed, as later chapters show, globalization can when
handled in certain ways promote cultural diversity, revival and innovation.


Westernization

A fourth common conception of globalization has defined it as westerniza¬
tion. As such, globalization is regarded as a particular type of universaliza¬
tion, one in which social structures of modernity (capitalism, industrialism,
rationalism, urbanism, individualism, etc.) are spread across all of humanity,
in the process destroying pre-existent cultures and local autonomy.
Globalization understood in this way is often interpreted as colonization,
Americanization and (in the vocabulary of the Iranian intellectual, Ale
Ahmad) ‘westoxification’. For these critics, talk of globalization is a hege¬
monic discourse, an ideology of supposed progress that masks far-reaching
subordination by the West of the rest (Petras and Veltmeyer, 2001).

To be sure, a cogent case can be made that current large-scale globalization
has resulted mainly from forces of modernity like rationalist knowledge,
capitalist production, and bureaucratic governance (cf. Giddens, 1990). At
the same time, early global consciousness arguably facilitated the onset of
modernity, too (Robertson, 1992: 170). In turn, contemporary globalization
has often inserted patterns of modern, western social relations more widely
and deeply across the planet. Sometimes this westernization has involved
violent impositions that could indeed warrant descriptions as imperialism.
Moreover, it is true that governance institutions, firms, mass media, acade¬
mics and civil society associations in Western Europe and North America
have ranked among the most enthusiastic promoters of contemporary glob¬
alization.

Yet it is one thing to assert that globalization and westernization have had
interconnections and quite another to equate the two developments. After all,
modernity and western civilization have appeared in many other guises
besides contemporary globality. Moreover - and it is politically important to
acknowledge this - globalization could in principle be taken in non-western
directions: for example, Buddhist globalizations, Confucian globalizations,
Islamic globalizations, or possible future postmodern globalizations (cf.
Pettman, 2005). Also, it is by no means clear that globalization is intrinsically
imperialist, given that there are emancipatory global social movements as
well as exploitative global processes.

In any case, westernization, modernization and colonization have a much
longer history than contemporary intense globalization. Perhaps currently



Defining Globalization 59


prevailing forms of globality could be analysed as a particular aspect, phase
and type of modernity. On this reading, a definition of globalization would
need to specify what makes global modernity distinctive. Yet in this
approach, too, westernization and globalization are not coterminous.

In sum, then, much talk of globalization has been analytically redundant.
The four types of definition outlined above between them cover much current
academic, corporate, journalistic, official and popular discussions of things
global. Critics of ‘globaloney’ are right to assail the historical illiteracy that
marks most claims of novelty associated with these conceptions of globaliza¬
tion.

Of course, this is not to suggest that debates about international inter¬
dependence, neoliberalism, universalism-versus-cultural diversity, modernity,
and imperialism are unimportant. Indeed, a well-fashioned concept of glob¬
alization could shed significant light on these issues. However, it is not help¬
ful to define globalization as - to treat it as equivalent to -
internationalization, liberalization, universalization or westernization. Not
only do we thereby merely rehash old knowledge, but we also lose a major
opportunity to grasp - and act upon - certain key circumstances of our times.


A way forward

Fortunately, the four definitions critiqued above do not exhaust the possible
conceptions of globalization. Important new insight into historically rela¬
tively new conditions is available from a fifth notion. This approach identifies
globalization as the spread of transplanetary - and in recent times also more
particularly supraterritorial - connections between people.

A global (in the sense of transplanetary) social relation is one that (like an
Internet chat room and certain communicable diseases) can link persons situ¬
ated at any inhabitable points on the earth. Globalization involves reductions
of barriers to such transworld social contacts. With globalization people
become more able - physically, legally, linguistically, culturally and psycho¬
logically - to engage with each other wherever on planet Earth they might be.

In this fifth usage, globalization refers to a shift in the nature of social space.
This conception contrasts with the other four notions of globalization discussed
above, all of which presume (usually implicitly rather than explicitly) a conti¬
nuity in the underlying character of social geography. To clarify this crucial
point, the following pages first note the general importance of space in social
relations and then elaborate on the features of transplanetary and, more specif¬
ically, supraterritorial links between persons. The far-reaching methodological
implications of this understanding of globalization are also noted, although the
final section of the chapter highlights several major qualifications to the defini¬
tion of globalization as growing transplanetary connectivity.



60 Framework of Analysis


To clarify the vocabulary, in the approach adopted here, the words
‘global’, ‘transplanetary’ and ‘transworld’ are treated as synonyms. They are
therefore used interchangeably in the rest of this book. References to
‘supraterritoriality’ are made whenever that more particular quality of glob-
ality comes into play.


Space

The term globality resonates of spatiality. It says something about the arena
and the place of human action and experience: the where of social life. In
particular, globality identifies the planet - the earth as a whole - as a field of
social relations in its own right. Talk of the global indicates that people may
interact not only in built, local, provincial, country and macro-regional
realms, but also in transplanetary spaces where the earth is a single place.

Why highlight issues of space? Most social analysis takes the spatial aspect
as an unexplored given. Yet geography is a defining feature of social life (cf.
Lefebvre, 1974; Gregory and Urry, 1985; Massey, 1994; Thrift, 1996;
Brenner etal., 2003). Relations between people always occur somewhere: in
a place, a location, a domain, a site. No description of a social circumstance
is complete without a spatial component.

Moreover, no social explanation is complete without a geographical
dimension either. Space matters. To take one ready example, geographical
differences mean that desert nomads and urban dwellers lead very diverse
lives. Space is a core feature - as both cause and effect - of social life. On the
one hand, the geographical context shapes the ways that people formulate
knowledge, relate to nature, undertake production, experience time, organize
governance, construct identities, and form collectivities. Concurrently,
culture, ecology, economics, history, politics and psychology also shape the
spatial contours of social relations.

Given these dense interconnections, a major change of spatial structure
affects society as a whole. A reconfiguration of social geography is intimately
interlinked with shifts in patterns of knowledge, production, governance,
identity, and social ecology. So a transformation of social space - like large-
scale globalization - is enveloped in larger dynamics of social change.


Globality: transplanetary relations and supraterritoriality

Globality in the conception adopted here has two qualities. The more general
feature, transplanetary connectivity, has figured in human history for many
centuries. The more specific characteristic, supraterritoriality, is relatively
new to contemporary history. Inasmuch as the recent rise of globality marks
a striking break from the territorialist geography that came before, this trend
potentially has major implications for wider social transformation.



Defining Globalization 61


Globality in the broader sense of transplanetary (‘across the planet’) rela¬
tions refers to social links between people located at points anywhere on
earth. The global field is in these cases a social space in its own right. The
globe, planet Earth, is not simply a collection of smaller geographical units
like regions, countries and localities; it is also itself a specific arena of social
life. A fundamental distinction can therefore be drawn between ‘international
relations’ (as exchanges between countries) and ‘global relations’ (as
exchanges within a planetary realm).

Of course, this more general kind of globality - transplanetary connec¬
tions between people - is by no means new to the past few decades. As the
next chapter stresses, long-distance and intercontinental domains have had
age-old importance in human history. On the other hand, as Chapter 3 also
shows, contemporary transplanetary links are denser than those of any previ¬
ous epoch. More people, more often, more extensively and more intensely
engage with the planetary arena as a single social place. Volumes of
transworld associations, communications, diseases, finance, investment,
travel and trade have never been as great.

However, the distinctiveness of recent globalization involves more than
the quantity, frequency, scope and depth of transplanetary social links.
Qualitatively, too, much of today’s global connectivity is different. Unlike
earlier times, contemporary globalization has been marked by a large-scale
spread of supraterritoriality.

As the word suggests, ‘supraterritorial’ relations are social connections
that substantially transcend territorial geography. They are relatively
delinked from territory, that is, spatial domains that are mapped on the land
surface of the earth, plus any adjoining waters and air spheres. Territorial
space is plotted on the three axes of longitude, latitude and altitude. In terri¬
torial geography, place refers to locations situated on this three-dimensional
grid; distance refers to the extent of territory separating territorial places; and
border refers to a territorial delimitation of sections of the earth’s surface.
(For more on territorial geography, see Gottman, 1973; Sack, 1986; Storey,
2001; Paasi, 2003; Elden, 2005.)

Yet territorial locations, territorial distances and territorial borders do not
define the whole geography of today’s transplanetary flows. These global
connections often also have qualities of transworld simultaneity (that is, they
extend anywhere across the planet at the same time) and transworld instan-
taneity (that is, they move anywhere on the planet in no time). Thus, for
example, on average 3,000 cups of Nescafe are reputedly drunk around the
planet every second (Nescafe, 2003), and telephone links permit immediate
communication across the ocean as readily as across the street. Global rela¬
tions with supraterritorial features are not adequately mapped on a territor¬
ial grid.

Supraterritorial forms of globality are evident in countless facets of



62 Framework of Analysis


contemporary life. For instance, jet aeroplanes transport passengers and
cargo across any distance on the planet within twenty-four hours.
Telecommunications networks effect instantaneous links between points all
over the earth, so that a call centre or data processing bureau for customers in
North America may be located twelve time zones away in India. The global
mass media spread messages simultaneously to transworld audiences. The US
dollar and the euro are examples of money that has instantaneous transplan¬
etary circulation. In global finance, various types of savings and investment
instruments (for example, offshore bank deposits and eurobonds) flow
instantaneously in transworld domains. Ecologically, developments such as
climate change, stratospheric ozone depletion, and losses of biological diver¬
sity unfold simultaneously on a global scale. Ideationally, many people have
a supraterritorial experience of place, for instance, when watching televised
moon landings and global sports events simultaneously with hundreds of
millions of other people scattered across the planet. Global human rights
campaigns do not measure their support for a cause as a function of the terri¬
torial distance and territorial borders that lie between advocates and victims.

With these and many more instances of supraterritoriality, current global¬
ization has constituted more than an extension of the compression of time
relative to territorial space that has unfolded over a number of past centuries.
In this long-term trend, developments in transportation technology like
motor ships, railways and early aircraft progressively reduced the time
needed to cover a given distance over the earth’s surface. Thus, while Marco
Polo took years to complete his journey across Eurasia in the thirteenth
century, by 1850 a sea voyage from South East Asia to North West Europe
could be completed in 59 days (PTT, 1951: 11). In the twentieth century,
motorized ships and land vehicles took progressively less time again to link
territorial locations. Nevertheless, such transport still required substantial
time spans to cross long distances and moreover still faced substantial
controls at territorial frontiers.

Whereas this older trend towards a shrinking world occurred within terri¬
torial geography, the newer spread of transplanetary simultaneity and instant -
aneity takes social relations substantially beyond territorial space. In cases of
supraterritoriality, place is not territorially fixed, territorial distance is
covered in no time, and territorial boundaries present no particular impedi¬
ment. The difference between territorial time-space compression and the rise
of supraterritoriality is qualitative and entails a deeper structural change of
geography.

A number of social researchers across a range of academic disciplines have
discerned this reconfiguration of space, albeit without invoking the term
‘supraterritoriality’ to describe the shift. Half a century ago, for example, the
philosopher Martin Heidegger proclaimed the advent of ‘distancelessness’
and an ‘abolition of every possibility of remoteness’ (1950: 165-6). Forty



Defining Globalization 63


years later the geographer David Harvey discussed ‘processes that so revolu¬
tionize the objective qualities of space and time that we are forced to alter,
sometimes in quite radical ways, how we represent the world to ourselves’
(1989: 240). The sociologist Manuel Castells has distinguished a ‘network
society’, in which a new ‘space of flows’ exists alongside the old ‘space of
places’ (1989: 348; also Castells, 1996-7; 2001). The anthropologist Marc
Auge has described an instantaneity that puts ‘any person into relation with
the entire world’ (1994: 95). In the field of International Relations, John
Ruggie has written of a ‘nonterritorial region’ in the contemporary world
(1993:172).

Might such a geographical transformation in the longer term prove to be
as epochal as the shift to territorialism was at an earlier historical juncture?
After all, social relations have not always and everywhere operated with a
macro spatial framework that is overridingly territorial. For instance,
cultures with a metaphysical cosmology have assigned only secondary if any
importance to territorial referents. In fact, a territorial grid to locate points on
a map was not introduced anywhere until the second century AD, by Zhang
Heng in China (Douglas, 1996: 22). Medieval people in Europe did not have
a notion of territory defined by three-dimensional geometry applied to the
earth’s surface (Zumthor, 1993; Hanawat and Kobialka, 2000). Images of
the world showing the continents in anything like the territorial shapes that
are commonly recognized today were not drawn before the late fifteenth
century. It took a further two hundred years before the first maps depicting
country units appeared (Campbell, 1987; Whitfield, 1994). Not until the
high tide of colonialism at the end of the nineteenth century did a territorial
logic dominate the construction of macro social spaces across the earth.

From then until the third quarter of the twentieth century, social spaces of
a macro kind (that is, as opposed to directly perceived micro social spaces like
built environments) nearly always took a territorial form. Indeed, one could
say that a structure of territorialism governed social geography. In a territori-
alist situation, people identify their location in the world primarily in relation
to territorial position. (In most cases the territorial reference points are fixed,
though for nomadic groups the spots may shift.) Moreover, in territorialist
social relations the length of territorial distances between places and the pres¬
ence or absence of territorial (especially state) borders between places heavily
influences the frequency and significance of contacts that people at different
territorial sites have with each other.

However, like any social structure, territorialism as the prevailing mode of
geography was specific to a particular historical and cultural context. True,
many people today still use the terms ‘geography’ and ‘territory’ interchange¬
ably, as if to exclude the possibility that social space could have other than
territorial forms. Yet world geography today is in an important respect not
like that of the period to the mid-twentieth century. Following several



64 Framework of Analysis


decades of proliferating and expanding supraterritorial connections, territor¬
iality has lost its monopoly hold. Territorial domains remain very important,
but they no longer define the entire macro spatial framework.

As Chapter 3 indicates in detail, most of the rise of supraterritoriality is
recent. As with any development, longer-term antecedents can of course be
found. However, supraterritorial connectivity has reached by far its greatest
extents during the past half-century. Earlier periods did not know jet travel,
intercontinental missiles, transworld migrants with transborder remittances,
satellite communications, facsimiles, the Internet, instant transplanetary tele¬
vision broadcasts, intercontinental production chains, transworld retailers,
global credit cards, a continuous diet of global sports tournaments, or large-
scale transplanetary anthropogenic ecological changes. Contemporary
history is supraterritorial to degrees well beyond anything previously known.

True, enthusiasm at discovering something new - a significant reconfigur¬
ation of social geography - must not prompt overstatements of its extent.
Globalization in the more specific sense of the spread of supraterritoriality
has been less extensive than globalization in the more general sense of the
growth of transplanetary connections. The supraterritorial aspects of
contemporary globalization have far-reaching transformative potentials, but
they constitute only part of the larger trend, and assessments of currently
unfolding social change need to be correspondingly tempered.


Global, world, international and transnational

Further clarification of the idea of globality that is suggested here may be
obtained by comparing the term with cognate concepts such as ‘world’,
‘international’ and ‘transnational’ links. All of these words put the spotlight
on social relations beyond society conceived on nation/state/country lines.
However, the four notions imply different emphases and should not be
conflated.

At first glance, ‘world’ might seem synonymous with ‘global’, since in
contemporary modern society ‘the world’ is generally conceived as planet
earth. Indeed, this book invokes ‘transworld’ as a synonym for ‘transplane¬
tary’. The so-called Stanford School of sociologists in the USA has explored
themes of globalization under the label of ‘world society theory’ (Meyer et al.,
1997; Boli and Thomas, 1999). In Germany Niklas Luhmann and his follow¬
ers have developed arguments about Weltgesellschaft (Luhmann, 1982;
Albert and Hilkermeier, 2004). In the field of International Relations a
number of scholars have also invoked notions of ‘world society’ to designate
a transplanetary cobweb of human interaction (Burton, 1972; Bull, 1977).

However, ‘world’ can denote the totality of social relations in other than
planetary contexts. People in other eras and cultures have identified their
‘world’ in non-global ways. For example, the ancient Chinese mapped their



Defining Globalization 65


‘world’ in terms of a Middle Kingdom surrounded by peripheries of barbar¬
ians. Other ancient civilizations unfolded in a Mediterranean ‘world’.
Medieval Europeans conceived of the ‘world’ in terms of relations between
humanity, nature and God, without resort to an atlas. Hence ‘world’ is a
more generic notion. Globality (in the sense of connectivity across the earthly
planetary realm) has featured in some social ‘worlds’ throughout history, but
far from all.

Moreover, the contemporary world has multiple spatial dimensions in
addition to the global. World social relations today have regional, country,
local, household and other geographical aspects alongside the transplanetary
facets. Thus ‘world’ is the social-geographical whole, while ‘global’ is only
one of its spatial qualities.

The distinction between ‘global’ and ‘international’ has been stressed
already, but it bears reiteration. ‘International’ exhanges occur between
country units, while ‘global’ transactions occur within a planetary unit.
Whereas international relations are inter -territorial relations, global relations
are trans- and sometimes supra -territorial relations. Thus global economics is
different from international economics, global politics is different from inter¬
national politics, and so on.

Finally, a number of researchers have since the 1970s adopted a discourse
of ‘transnational’ relations to analyse social interchange beyond the state and
national society (Merle 1974; Keohane and Nye, 1977). This conception has
the merit of highlighting non-governmental relations between countries and
non-national forms of social bonds (e.g., transnational religious and class
solidarities). However, ideas of transnationalism offer less when it comes to
elaborating a more specific conception of the character of these non-statist
and non-nationalist circumstances. In contrast, notions of global relations
positively identify the transplanetary and supraterritorial qualities of various
social relations.

Another objection to the vocabulary of trans nationality is that it still takes
the nation-state-country as its reference point and to that extent retains traces
of methodological nationalism and statism. Indeed, transnational relations
are usually conceived as transactions across state borders. On the other hand,
ideas of globality avoid domestic/foreign, internal/external dichotomies and
thereby foster a clear and important methodological reorientation.


Methodological implications

If contemporary social geography is no longer territorialist in character, then
traditional habits of social research need to be adjusted. Methodological
territorialism has exercised a pervasive and deep hold on the conventions of
social enquiry. The spread of transplanetary and supraterritorial links
requires an important shift of approach.



66 Framework of Analysis


Methodological territorialism refers to the practice of understanding and
investigating social relations through the lens of territorial geography.
Territorialist method means formulating concepts, asking questions,
constructing hypotheses, gathering and interpreting evidence, and drawing
conclusions in a spatial framework that is wholly territorial. These intellec¬
tual habits are so engrained that most social researchers reproduce them more
or less unconsciously.

Methodological territorialism lies at the heart of currently prevailing
commonsense notions of geography, economy, governance, history, litera¬
ture, culture and society. Thus the vast majority of social and political geog¬
raphers have conceived of the world in terms of bordered territorial
(especially country) units. Likewise, macroeconomists have normally studied
production, exchange and consumption in relation to national (read territor¬
ial) and international (read inter-territorial) realms. Students of politics have
conventionally regarded governance as a territorial question, that is, as a
matter of local and country governments, with the latter sometimes meeting
in ‘international’ (again, code for inter-territorial) organizations. Similarly,
mainstream historians have examined continuity and change over time in
respect of territorial contexts such as localities and countries (cf. Mazlish and
Buultjens, 1993; Geyer and Bright, 1995; Schafer, 2003). Literature has
generally been classed in terms of national-territorial genres: English litera¬
ture, Indonesian literature, etc. For their part, anthropologists have almost
invariably conceived of culture and community with reference to territorial
units, in the sense of local and national peoples (Ekholm and Friedman,
1985). Meanwhile territorialist premises have led sociologists usually to
assume that society by definition takes a territorial (usually national) form:
hence Albanian society, Bolivian society, Chinese society, etc. (Mann, 1986:
13-17; Wallerstein, 1986).

Like any analytical device, methodological territorialism involves simplifi¬
cation. Actual social practice has always been more complicated.
Nevertheless, this assumption offered a broadly viable intellectual shortcut
for earlier generations of scholars. Methodological territorialism reflected
the social conditions of a particular epoch when territorial places situated
within bordered territorial units and separated by territorial distances formed
far and away the overriding framework for macro social geography.

However, territorialist analysis is not a timeless or universally applicable
method. The emergence of the states-system, the growth of mercantile and
industrial capitalism, and the rise of national identities all understandably
encouraged researchers of earlier times to adopt methodologically territorial¬
ist perspectives. Yet today large-scale globalization - including the substan¬
tial spread of supraterritoriality - should stimulate a reconstruction of
methodology on alternative, nonterritorialist premises.

This call for different intellectual foundations no doubt provokes resistance



Defining Globalization 67


in some quarters. It is difficult and even painful to change taken-for-granted
knowledge, to reassess a cornerstone of understanding of social relations, to
endure the disruption and confusion that comes in the transition between
abandoning one set of first principles and consolidating another. Moreover,
a postterritorialist methodology has political implications that vested inter¬
ests could oppose. For example, postterritorialist social knowledge would
logically undercut the primacy of both state-centric research and state-centric
governance.

Yet it can arguably be quite dangerous to give methodological territorial-
ism further lease on life in the contemporary more global world. For example,
territorialist assumptions are obviously unsuitable to understand - and
address - transplanetary ecological issues. Likewise, if significant parts of
capitalism now operate with relative autonomy from territorial space, then
old intellectual frameworks cannot adequately address the issues of distribu¬
tive justice that invariably accompany processes of surplus accumulation.
Similarly, a political theory that offers today’s world only territorial
constructions of community, citizenship and democracy is obsolete. Flence
the stakes in the call for postterritorialist enquiry are much more than acade¬
mic alone.


Manifestations of globality

The character and scale of globalization as the spread of transplanetary
connections - including many (mainly recent) links that have a supraterritor-
ial quality - may be further clarified with a survey of transworld activities.
Such a review indicates that globality can touch pretty well all aspects of
social life. That said, as the final section of this chapter emphasizes, it does not
follow that global relations have become anything close to the only feature of
social geography, either today or in the foreseeable future.

A great deal of globality is manifested through communications, that is,
exchanges of ideas, information, images, signals, sounds and text.
Transworld communication can be effected by means of the book trade,
postal services, telegraph, telephone, facsimile, telex, text messaging, video-
conference, computer networks, newspaper, magazine, radio, television,
video and film. Supraterritoriality comes into global communications when,
for example, certain publications (like Harry Potter books) and recordings
(like Eminem CDs) are released simultaneously across the planet. In addition,
satellite broadcasts and transoceanic cables enable communication to be
effected instantaneously between any points on earth, irrespective of the terri¬
torial distances and territorial borders that lie between them. Thus toll-free
numbers can link up to a call centre on any continent.

The Internet is supraterritorial communication par excellence, instantly
relaying a full range of visual and auditory signals anywhere on the planet



68 Framework of Analysis


that terminals exist to send and receive them. Much of today’s globality is an
‘e-world’ of e-commerce, e-friendship, e-government, and e-mail. Indeed, in
September 2001 the Internet allowed doctors in New York, USA to perform
transoceanic robot-assisted telesurgery on a patient in Strasbourg, France
(Pogue, 2001). The notion that the Internet involves new kinds of social geo¬
graphy is well conveyed by the term ‘cyberspace’ (Kitchin, 1998; Kitchin and
Dodge, 2002).

Other globality occurs in the transplanetary movement of people. Global
travel is undertaken by many migrant labourers, professionals, pilgrims,
refugees, tourists, adventurers, adopted children and more. Relevant modes
of transworld transport include caravans, ships, trains, motor vehicles and
aeroplanes. Jet aircraft in particular have introduced something approaching
a supraterritorial quality into contemporary global travel, as passengers can
be flown between any two locations on the earth within a day. Transworld
travel enables the occurrence of large global convocations like the haj, profes¬
sional congresses, tourist resorts, trade fairs, and United Nations summits.
Transplanetary movements of domestics and sex workers have brought glob¬
alization into many a household and brothel (Ehrenreich and Hochschild,
2002). Some business travellers have the globe as their office, working from
hotels and airport lounges as much as a fixed home base. Increasing numbers
of pensioners have undertaken ‘retirement migration’ for their sunset years
(King et al., 2000). Conflicts in Afghanistan, Bosnia, Somalia and elsewhere
have generated global waves of refugees and asylum seekers. Although state
border controls restrict global travel in many cases, millions upon millions of
people each year move about the planet as a single place.

Further globality is manifested in certain production processes. In so-
called ‘global factories’ (Fuentes and Ehrenreich, 1983) or ‘global commod¬
ity chains’ (Gereffi and Korzeniewicz, 1994), different stages of the
production of a commodity are sited at several (perhaps very widely scat¬
tered) locations on the planet. Thus, in principle, the research centre, design
unit, procurement office, fabrication plant, finishing point, assembly line,
quality control operation, data processing office, advertising bureau and
after-sales service could each be situated in different provinces, countries and
continents across the planet. Global production involves intra-firm trade
within a transworld company as well as, if not more than, inter-national trade
between countries. Through so-called ‘global sourcing’, a producer draws the
required inputs from a transplanetary field, rather than being restricted to a
particular country or region. Differences in local costs of labour, raw materi¬
als, regulation and taxation often figure more importantly in these business
calculations than the costs of transport across territorial distance and borders
between the various sites in the global production chain. This type of manu¬
facture has developed especially in respect of textiles, clothing, motor vehi¬
cles, leather goods, sports articles, toys, optical products, consumer



Defining Globalization 69


electronics, semiconductors, aircraft and construction equipment. A global
production process has supraterritorial qualities inasmuch as it occurs simul¬
taneously and with tight coordination across a transworld space.

Globality can be manifested in consumption as well as production. Many
commodities are distributed and sold through global markets, sometimes in
the context of a tightly coordinated supraterritorial business strategy. In this
way consumers dispersed across the planet purchase the same good or
service, often under a single brand name like Nike, Pepsi-Cola or Toyota.
Already in the 1980s, Howard Perlmutter of the Wharton Business School
identified 136 industries where a global marketing strategy had supposedly
become vital to commercial success (Main, 1989: 55). The vast range of
global products has come to include many raw materials, GM plants, pack¬
aged foods, bottled beverages, cigarettes, designer clothes, household articles
and appliances, pharmaceuticals, music recordings, audio-visual produc¬
tions, printed publications, online information services, financial instru¬
ments, office equipment, armaments, transport vehicles, travel services and
much more. Citicorp has proclaimed itself to be ‘your global bank’, and Peter
Stuyvesant has marketed itself as ‘the global cigarette’. Transworld products
have come to figure in the everyday lives of much of humanity, whether
through actual purchases or through unfulfilled desires evoked by global
advertising.

Global communications, global travel, global production and global
markets have all promoted, and been facilitated by, global money. That is,
some units of account, means of payment, stores of value and mediums of
exchange have transplanetary circulation. For example, the ‘US’ dollar, the
‘Japanese’ yen, the ‘British’ pound and other major denominations are much
more than national currencies. As supraterritorial monies, they are used
anywhere on earth at the same time and move (electronically and via air
transport) anywhere on earth in effectively no time. In addition, the Special
Drawing Right (SDR) and the euro have emerged through the IMF and the
EU, respectively, as suprastate monies with transworld circulation. Many
bankcards can extract cash in local currency from automated teller machines
(ATMs) connected to supraterritorial networks like Maestro and Cirrus.
Several credit cards like Visa, MasterCard and American Express can be used
for payments at countless establishments in almost every country across the
planet (Mandell, 1990; Ritzer, 1995). An exception like Iran stands out by
outlawing global credit cards. Although not yet in wide usage, digital money
can be stored on certain smart cards (so-called electronic purses) in multiple
currencies at once, creating something of a global wallet.

Globality also appears in many areas of finance. For instance, most foreign
exchange transactions today take place through a round-the-globe, round-
the-clock market that connects the dealing rooms of New York, Sydney,
Tokyo, Singapore, Hong Kong, Zurich, Frankfurt and Tondon. In global



70 Framework of Analysis


banking, depositors place their savings in a global currency and/or at a global
bank and/or at a global branch location such as a so-called ‘offshore’ finan¬
cial centre. These practices contrast with territorial banking, in which clients
deposit their savings in their national currency at a local or national bank
within their country of residence. With transworld payments, migrant work¬
ers use global banking networks to remit some of their earnings to relations
at another corner of the planet. Meanwhile global bank loans occur when a
lender (or syndicate of lenders, perhaps spread across several countries)
provides credit in a global currency. Thus, for example, a group of banks
based in Austria, the Netherlands and the UK might issue a loan in US dollars
to a borrower in the Dominican Republic. The level of interest on such a
credit is generally not the prevailing national percentage, but a function of a
supraterritorial benchmark like the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate
(LIBOR). At the same time, micro-credit schemes in local communities can be
linked to global institutions like the World Bank. Similarly, global bonds
(often called ‘eurobonds’) involve a transworld currency as well as borrow¬
ers, investors, a syndicate of managers, and securities exchanges that are
spread across multiple countries. Global financial transactions also occur on
similar lines in respect of medium-term notes and short-term credit instru¬
ments like treasury bills and commercial paper. In equity markets, mean¬
while, global shares are company stocks that are: (a) listed on several
securities exchanges across the earth; and/or (b) held by investors spread
across the planet. For their part derivatives have a global character when, for
example, the same futures contract is traded simultaneously on the Chicago,
Singapore and London markets, as well as through electronic links between
them. Insurance policies, too, can have global coverage in a global currency
and/or are handled by global companies in global financial centres. In addi¬
tion, many private and institutional investors maintain global portfolios.
That is, they spread their funds across banks, stocks, bonds, money-market
tools, derivatives contracts and insurance policies from around the globe.
Indeed, with supraterritorial dealing, a broker can buy and sell financial
instruments anywhere on the planet instantaneously with a telephone call or
the click of a mouse. Several major financial markets like the National
Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation system (Nasdaq), set
up in 1971, and its European counterpart (Easdaq), launched in 1996, have
no fixed territorial meeting place at all. In sum, then, much of today’s foreign
exchange, banking, securities, derivatives and insurance business occurs
globally and with considerable delinkage from territorial space.

Through all of the activities already mentioned, people may be globally
connected through organizations, that is, associations that coordinate the
activities of individuals spread across the planet. Many of these organizations
pursue mainly commercial purposes as global companies (often imprecisely
named ‘multinational corporations’). The thousands of examples include



Defining Globalization 71


Inter Press Service, Mitsubishi, Nokia, Novartis, Standard Chartered, and
Royal Dutch/Shell. In addition, many businesses have developed various
types of transworld coalitions, often termed ‘strategic alliances’ (for instance,
joint ventures, subcontracting arrangements, franchises, and so on). Highly
visible examples include the One World and Sky Team airline groups. Other
transplanetary organizations have mainly regulatory functions and can suit¬
ably be called global governance institutions. For instance, activities of the
IMF, the WTO and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) extend across the planet. Some regionally, country-,
and locally-based governance bodies like the EU, the United States govern¬
ment and the London municipal authorities also have significant global
reach. Along with commercial and governance agencies, many civil society
associations also have a global organization. They include faith-based
groups like the World Fellowship of Buddhists, labour movements like the
ICFTU, NGOs like Amnesty International, peasant coalitions like Via
Campesina, and philanthropic bodies like the Ford Foundation. In addi¬
tion, many localized civil society associations organize globally through
coalitions and other networks. For example, the global Oxfam network
encompassed nearly 3,000 local associations in some 80 countries in the
year 2000 (Hajnal, 2002: 57, 60). Still other global organizations involve
clandestine operations like transworld criminal networks (Berdal and
Serrano, 2002).

Globality is further manifested in some military activities. Contemporary
arsenals include a number of global weapons that can range across pretty well
any distance over the earth. Examples include spy satellites, long-range
bomber and surveillance aircraft, and unpiloted intercontinental missiles.
Global warfare occurs when a campaign of armed combat is pursued from
widely spread points across the planet. For instance, although the battlefields
lay in Iraq, the 2003 war against Saddam Hussein’s Ba’ath regime involved
command headquarters in the USA and Qatar, air bases in Europe and
Kuwait, troops and arms from several continents, and satellites in outer
space. Likewise, the British military has maintained a global presence with
contingents in over 80 countries as of 2002, whereas 250,000 US troops
were stationed in 120 countries as of 2005 (FT, 12 July 2002). So-called
‘rapid reaction forces’ can be deployed anywhere on the planet within hours.
UN peacekeeping operations involve multinational armies deployed
anywhere on earth. Certain paramilitary groups like Al-Qaida and the Irish
Republican Army (IRA) have also operated as transworld networks. The
attacks of 11 September 2001 brought home as never before the potential
impact of informal global militias using global communications and global
finance.

Ecologically, a planetary life-support system has of course operated from
the moment that the first organisms appeared on earth. However, some



72 Framework of Analysis


matters of social ecology can also have global qualities. Several major anthro¬
pogenic (i.e., human-induced) environmental changes have had a pronounced
transworld dimension. For example, the anthropogenic greenhouse effect is
allegedly producing planetary climate change, popularly known as ‘global
warming’. Neither the causes nor the effects of this trend can be territorially
specified and restricted. Similarly, stratospheric ozone depletion (and its
reversal) is largely a distanceless and borderless process. With respect to the
biosphere, the contemporary more global world is experiencing major reduc¬
tions in the diversity of ecosystems, in the number of species of life, and in the
variety of genes that circulate within individual species. In contemporary
genetic engineering, recombinant DNA techniques allow a gene to be taken
from one organism anywhere on earth and put into a second organism at any
other location. Another headline global ecological issue asks how many
people the planet can support at one time. Further environmental conditions
with global aspects include radioactive fallout, atmospheric flows of sulphur
dioxide and nitrogen oxide (so-called ‘acid rain’), the depletion of tropical
moist forests, desertification, changes in sea level, marine pollution, manage¬
ment of ocean fish stocks, big dams, possible future shortages of fresh water
and arable soil, and waste disposal in outer space. Although the severity of
these various ecological problems can be debated, it is clear that none of them
is confined to a particular country or region.

Sometimes closely related with ecological concerns, a number of health
matters, too, have global dimensions (WHO, 2001; Lee, 2002,2003; Pirages,
2006). Since prehistory natural forces of waters and winds have transported
micro-organisms across the planet. In addition, people have for many
centuries carried a number of communicable diseases across and between
continents, including plague, small pox, anthrax, cholera, syphilis, measles,
tuberculosis and influenza. Yet contemporary times have raised the speed and
magnitude of global spreads of various human, animal and plant diseases.
Examples include HIV/AIDS, SARS, BSE, foot and mouth disease, and
gemini viruses. For bacteria and viruses, the planet is one microbial pool in
which pathogens don’t carry passports. Other questions of human health
with transplanetary aspects include bodily harms related to tobacco
consumption, illicit drug use, and occupational conditions. In 2002 the
World Health Organization (WHO) warned of a ‘globesity’ pandemic of
overweight middle classes across the planet. Needless to say, successful
strategies to address these health issues also require a partly global approach.

Much globality is also found in the area of law. Countless formal rules and
regulations have acquired a transworld character. The widely diverse exam¬
ples include various arms control schemes, criminal laws, environmental
agreements, human rights conventions, technical standards, and trade rules.
In addition, some law firms have developed transworld networks of offices,
while police forces have pursued transplanetary cooperation through the



Defining Globalization 73


International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol). Global suprastate
courts include the International Court of Justice (ICJ), ad hoc war crimes
tribunals, and the recently established International Criminal Court (ICC). In
addition, some national courts hear cases that relate to transworld issues,
such as various global intellectual property claims that are brought before US
tribunals.

Finally, globality is evident in social relations through global conscious¬
ness. In other words, people often think globally. In addition to holding
microcosmic conceptions of the social realm as a district or a country, people
can also hold macrocosmic notions, where the planet is regarded as a ‘global
village’. Globally minded people regard the planet as a principal source of
their food supplies, their entertainments, their threats and their friends. Some
workers like Ghanaian traders and Filipina domestics see the whole earth (as
opposed to a particular locality or country) as their potential workplace.
Transworld consciousness also takes form in certain languages (e.g., English,
Esperanto and Spanish), certain icons (e.g., Coca-Cola labels), certain narra¬
tives (e.g., soap operas), certain fashions (e.g., blue jeans), certain rituals (e.g.,
sending postcards), and other symbols. Awareness of the planet as a single
social place is furthermore evident in events like global sports competitions
(including global supporters clubs for some teams), global exhibitions, global
film festivals, global tours by music superstars, global conferences, and global
panics (Taylor, 1997; Giulianotti, 1999). Since 1982 Disney World has taken
thousands of visitors through its ‘Spaceship Earth’ attraction, a ride through
world history (Schafer, 2005). Over 750 properties have been placed on
UNESCO’s World Heritage List of sites holding ‘outstanding value to
humanity’ since the launch of that programme in 1972 (WHC, 2004). The
UN has nurtured global culture through the dedication since 1949 of over
125 decades, years, weeks and days, including a succession of Development
Decades, the International Year of Indigenous Peoples, and World AIDS Day
(Drori, forthcoming). In addition, global consciousness has arisen when
people conceive of their social affiliations in transplanetary and supraterritor-
ial terms, for instance, with transworld solidarities based on class, gender,
generation, profession, race, religion, sexual orientation and indeed human¬
ity as such. Stories of aliens from outer space seem telling in this regard: the
foreign other is conceived not as another nationality from another territory,
but as another life form from another planet, thereby defining humanity and
the earth as one.

All of the many instances of globality just described (and summarized in the
following box) are discussed in greater detail later in this book, where these
activities are also related to questions of deeper social structure. The present
concise survey merely serves to demonstrate the widespread incidence of trans-
planetary - including more particularly supraterritorial - circumstances across
contemporary social life. Cumulatively, all of this global communication,



74 Framework of Analysis


global travel, global production, global consumption, global money, global
finance, global organization, global military, global ecology, global health,
global law and global consciousness indicates that contemporary social rela¬
tions cannot be described without extensive reference to transworld spaces.


Manifestations of globality in summary

Communications

• post

• telecommunications

• mass media

Travel

• migrant labour

• pilgrims

• refugees

• tourists

• business travellers

Production

• transworld production chains

• global sourcing of inputs

Markets

• global products

• global marketing and sales strategies
Money

• global currencies

• bank cards with access to global ATM networks

• global credit cards

• digital cash in electronic purses

Finance

• foreign exchange markets

• banking (deposits, payments and loans)

• securities markets

• derivatives trading

• insurance business

Organizations

• global commercial enterprises

• global governance agencies

• global civil society associations




Defining Globalization 75


Military

• global weapons

• global campaigns

Ecology

• global atmosphere (climate change, ozone depletion, radioactive fall¬
out, acid rain)

• global biosphere (loss of biological diversity, deforestation)

• global hydrosphere (rising sea level, marine pollution, reduced fresh
water)

• global geosphere (desertification, loss of arable soil)

Health

• global communicable diseases

• global aspects of diet, drug use and occupational conditions

• global campaigns of health improvement

Law

• global rules and regulations

• transworld networks of lawyers and police

• global courts

Consciousness

• conceptions of the planet as a single place

• global symbols

• global events

• transworld solidarities


Qualifications

The preceding discussion has made a strong case for what globalization is, in
terms of a change in social space that is both quantitatively and qualitatively
significant. However, it is equally important to emphasize what the growth in
transplanetary connections and the spread of supraterritoriality do not entail.
In particular it is crucial to reject the following six non sequiturs: globalism,
reification, global/local binaries, cultural homogenization, universality, and
political neutrality.


Globalism

First, then, the rise of transplanetary and supraterritorial connectivity in no
way means that territorial space has ceased to matter. We should not replace




76 Framework of Analysis


methodological territorialism with a globalism that looks only at transplane¬
tary relations and ignores the importance of territorial spaces. We do not live
in a ‘borderless world’ where territory is ‘obsolescent’ (Ohmae, 1990,1995;
O’Brien, 1992; Rosecrance, 1995; also Badie, 1995). Although contempo¬
rary history has witnessed the end of territorialzswz (where social space is
effectively reducible to territorial grids), we have certainly not seen the end of
territoriality. To say that social geography can no longer be understood in
terms of territorial spaces alone is of course not to say that territoriality has
become irrelevant.

On the contrary, territorial production arrangements, territorial governance
mechanisms, territorial ecology and territorial identities remain highly signifi¬
cant at the start of the twenty-first century, even if territoriality does not
monopolize the situation as before. For example, many communications links
like airports, roads, railways and shipping lanes remain territorially fixed.
Several recent economic studies have suggested that territorial distance remains
a strong influence on trade in manufactures as well as - perhaps more surpris¬
ingly-financial assets (Portes and Rey, 1999; Aviat and Coeurdacier, 2004). In
other words, people are still more likely to do foreign business with countries
that are territorially closer. In addition, territorial borders continue to exert
strong influences on movements of material goods and people (Helliwell,
1998). It can take months to complete the dozens of official documents
required to export legally from India. Meanwhile countless localized products
remain bound to particular territorial markets. Largely territorially bound
commodities derived from agriculture and mining have persisted at the same
time that largely supraterritorial commodities like information and communi¬
cations have risen to prominence. While US dollars and Visa card payments
cross the planet instantly, many other forms of money continue to have
restricted circulation within a given territorial domain, and national currencies
show no sign of disappearing altogether (Gilbert and Helleiner, 1999). Most
people today still hold their bank accounts at a local branch or do no banking
at all. Much ecological degradation is linked to specific territorial locations, for
instance, of overgrazing, salination, or dumping of toxic wastes. In terms of
social affiliations, some observers have suggested that territorially bound iden¬
tities could even have become more rather than less significant in a world of
diminishing territorial barriers (Mlinar, 1992; Harvey, 1993). Certainly terri¬
torial politics surrounding Palestine and Taiwan remain as heated as ever.

So the end of territorialism has not marked the start of globalism. The
addition of supraterritorial qualities of geography has not eliminated the
territorial aspects (Brenner, 1998, 1999). Indeed, as later chapters in this
book indicate, contemporary globalization has been closely connected with
certain forms of re territorialization like the rise of micro-nationalist politics,
urbanization and the growth of globally connected cities, and the prolifera¬
tion of offshore arrangements.



Defining Globalization 77


Perhaps the most striking reterritorialization to accompany recent global¬
ization has been regionalization (Gamble and Payne, 1996; Frankel, 1998).
Some of this regionalization has occurred within states, in cases like Flanders
in Belgium or Siberia in Russia. Other regionalization has had a trans-state
character, such as the Basque area across France and Spain or the Kurdish
movement across Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey. Still other regionalization has
happened intergovernmentally, in projects like the East African Community
(EAC) and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). And considerable
regionalization has had an unofficial character, as in citizen action initiatives
like the European Social Forum (ESF) or academic networks such as the
Organization for Social Science Research in Eastern and Southern Africa
(OSSREA).

Clearly, social space in today’s world is both territorial and supraterritor-
ial. Indeed, in social practice the two qualities always intersect.
Supraterritoriality is only relatively deterritorialized, and contemporary
territoriality is only partly supraterritorialized. Territorial relations are no
longer purely territorial, and supraterritorial relations are not wholly non¬
territorial.

Thus, for example, every Internet user accesses cyberspace from a territo¬
rial location. Global products, global finance and global communications
always ‘touch down’ in territorial localities. Supraterritorial military tech¬
nologies like spy satellites are generally directed at territorial targets. So-
called ‘global cities’ such as London and Tokyo still have a longitude, latitude
and altitude. Global ecological changes have territorially specific impacts: for
example, rising sea level has different consequences for coastal zones as
against uplands.

In short, contemporary society knows no ‘pure’ globality that exists inde¬
pendently of territorial spaces. The recent accelerated growth of supraterri¬
toriality has brought a relative retreat from territoriality rather than its
complete removal from social life. In this sense the term ‘deterritorialization’
can have misleading connotations and is therefore avoided in this book (O
Tuathail, 1998,2000). Global relations today substantially rather than wholly
transcend territorial space. Although territoriality does not place insurmount¬
able constraints on supraterritoriality, global flows still have to engage with
territorial locations. The present world is globalizing, not totally globalized.

By the same token, however, little if any territoriality today exists inde¬
pendently of supraterritoriality. Most contemporary regional, country,
provincial and local conditions coexist with - and are influenced by - global
circumstances. Indeed, territoriality is changed by its encounters with
supraterritoriality. For example, as indicated in Chapter 6, territorial states
act differently in a globalizing world than in a territorialist one. Similarly,
territorial identities obtain different dynamics when they are associated with
global diasporas (e.g., of Armenians and Sikhs). Territorial environmental



78 Framework of Analysis


issues like local water shortages acquire different significance when they form
part of a transworld problem.

In sum, current globalization is not replacing one compact formula of
spatiality (territorialism) with another (globalism). Rather, the rise of supra-
territoriality is bringing greater complexity to geography - and by extension to
culture, ecology, economics, history, politics and social psychology as well. The
relative simplicity of a territorialist-statist-nationalist world is fading.


Reification

The preceding point regarding the interrelation of supraterritorial and terri¬
torial spaces points to a second caution, namely, regarding reification. While
globality is a discrete concept, it is not a discrete concrete condition. It is help¬
ful, analytically, to distinguish different spheres of social space; however,
concretely, the global is not a domain unto itself, separate from the regional,
the national, the provincial, the local, and the built environment. There is no
purely global circumstance, divorced from other spaces, just as no building,
locality, province, country or region is sealed off from other geographical
arenas.

So social space should not be understood as an assemblage of discrete
realms, but as an interrelation of spheres within a whole. Events and devel¬
opments are not global or national or local or some other scale, but an inter¬
section of global and other spatial qualities. The global is a dimension of
social geography rather than a space in its own right. It is heuristically help¬
ful to distinguish a global quality of contemporary social space, but we must
not turn the global into a ‘thing’ that is separate from regional, national, local
and household ‘things’.

For example, a government may be sited at a country ‘level’, but it is a
place where supranational, national and subnational spaces converge. Thus
states are involved in transworld law and regional arrangements as well as
national regulation and relations with provincial and local authorities.
Likewise, firms and other actors in today’s globalizing circumstances are
meeting points for co-constituting transworld, regional, national and local
aspects of geography. Hence the vocabulary of interconnected ‘scales’ is
preferable to that of separated ‘levels’.

Avoidance of reification is especially important in these early days of
global studies. Several centuries of international studies have suffered dearly
from a reified distinction between the national and the international, where
the ‘internal’ and ‘domestic’ was ontologically separated from the ‘external’
and ‘foreign’. In practice, of course, the ‘inside’ and the ‘outside’ of countries
are deeply intertwined. These old errors of reifying the international must not
be carried over into new research of the global.



Defining Globalization 79


Global/local binaries

The interrelatedness of dimensions of social space (as opposed to the exist¬
ence of separate domains) suggests that it is mistaken - as many have done -
to set up oppositions between the global and the local. Such a binary resur¬
rects in new form the misguided domestic/international dichotomy of old.
Typically, local/global polarizations have depicted the local as ‘here’, imme¬
diate and intimate, as against the global being ‘there’, distant and isolating.
The local is concrete, grounded, authentic, and meaningful, whereas the
global is abstract, unconnected, artificial and meaningless. The local purport¬
edly provides security and community, while the global houses danger and
violence. The local is innocent, the global manipulative. The local is the arena
for autonomy and empowerment, the global the realm of dependence and
domination. On such assumptions, some critics have rejected globalization
with calls for localization (Hewison, 1999; Hines, 2000).

Yet these global/local binaries do not bear up to closer scrutiny. After all,
people can have very immediate and intimate transworld relationships with
each other via jet travel, telephone and Internet. In contrast, many next-door
neighbours in contemporary cities do not even know each other’s names.
Supraterritorial communities of people (for example, sharing the same class
position, disability, religious faith or sexual orientation) can have far-reach¬
ing solidarity, whereas localities can experience deep fear, hatred and intoler¬
ance. Global flows frequently involve ordinary people leading everyday lives
(listening to radio and munching brand-name fast food), while various
exhibits of local culture are contrived. Indigenous peoples have used
transworld networks and laws to promote their self-determination, while
many a local elite has exercised repression over a district. Local officials can
be as inaccessible, unsympathetic, secretive, arbitrary and unaccountable as
authorities in global spheres. Devolution has brought greater popular control
through the regions in Spain, but it has also brought oppression through
many provinces in the Russian Federation. In short, there is nothing inher¬
ently alienating about the global and nothing intrinsically liberating about
the local.

Instead, both the local and the global have enabling and disabling poten¬
tials. Indeed, as already stressed, the two qualities are inseparable in social
practice; so terming one circumstance ‘local’ and another ‘global’ is actually
arbitrary and confusing. For example, globally mobile companies may follow
locally tailored marketing strategies, while locally grounded peasants may be
globalized through their televisions and religions. A social condition is not
positive or negative according to whether it is local as against global, since the
situation is generally both local and global at the same time. It is the particu¬
lar blend of local and global (and other spatial spheres) that matters, not
locality versus globality.



80 Framework of Analysis


Cultural homogenization

The complexity of multidimensional social space likewise suggests that it is
mistaken - as many observers have done - to associate globalization with
homogenization. The growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial connec¬
tivity does not ipso facto reduce cultural diversity. After all, the global, the
regional, the national, the provincial, and the local aspects of social space can
intertwine in innumerable different combinations. Indeed, by injecting a
further dimension into the geographical spectrum - thereby adding to its
complexity - globalization could just as well increase cultural pluralism.

True, the contemporary world has experienced considerable cultural
destruction. For example, languages have been disappearing at rates as
worrying as those for species extinction (Wurm, 1996). Indigenous peoples’
heritages have been undercut or erased across the planet. ‘Science’ has
triumphed worldwide as the most authoritative form of knowledge, often
running roughshod over religious and other thought (Drori et ai, 2003). A
high tide of consumerism has seemingly imposed cultural levelling across the
world, including via a multitude of global agents such as Carrefour, Michael
Jackson, Microsoft, and Madison Avenue advertisers.

On the other hand, perceptions of cultural homogenization in the context
of globalization can be exaggerated. For example, what appears on the
surface to be the same transplanetary language can in fact harbour widely
varying vocabularies and understandings across different social contexts. So
the English of Nairobi markets is not the English of the Scottish Highlands,
and the Spanish of East Tos Angeles barrios is not the Spanish of Santiago
office blocs (Rhedding-Jones, 2002). Likewise, as reception research has
shown, different parts of a transworld audience can read hugely different
meanings into a Hollywood blockbuster. In this regard it can be questioned
how far the diverse viewers actually ‘see’ the same global film (Tomlinson,
1991). Similarly, global marketers often have to adjust the design and adver¬
tisement of transworld products in ways that appeal to diverse cultural
contexts. Even an icon of global Americanization like McDonald’s varies its
menu considerably across the planet in relation to local sensibilities, with
kosher Big Macs in Jerusalem, vegetable McNuggets in New Delhi, and
McHuevo in Montevideo (Watson, 2000:122). Even global laws like labour
standards could be applied variably in accordance with local contexts. Thus
globalization is also glocalization (Robertson, 1992: 173-4; Kraidy, 1999;
Salcedo, 2003).

In any case, losses of cultural diversity are not intrinsic to globalization as
such. On the contrary, transplanetary and supraterritorial relations can host
great cultural heterogeneity (cf. Breidenbach and Zukrigl, 1998). For
instance, female genital cutting remains a matter of heated global cultural
contention (Boyle, 2002). Multiple world religions occupy sites on the



Defining Globalization 81


Internet, and all manner of peoples from racial diasporas to sexual minorities
have formed transworld associations.

Indeed, globalization has offered opportunities to reassert cultural distinc¬
tiveness. For example, indigenous peoples have used UN mechanisms and
electronic mass media to promote their particularity (Dowmunt, 1993;
Wilmer, 1993). Various movements of religious revivalism have used global
communications like Internet and satellite television to considerable effect in
advancing their causes. As elaborated in Chapter 7, globalization has also
promoted the growth of a host of other supraterritorial identities.

By breaking down territorial distances that previously effected consider¬
able segregation of cultures, globality can also foster innovative blends of
traditions. For example, ethnic minority youth in Frankfurt-am-Main have
combined aspects of African-American rap music and hip-hop culture with
elements of their North African and Turkish heritages to create novel modes
of expression for their hybrid identities in contemporary Germany (Bennett,
1999). So-called ‘world music’ has mixed different strains to the point that
the original elements are no longer distinguishable. Similarly, fusion cooking
combines elements of traditional cuisines from widely scattered parts of the
planet to create new menus. Some observers take such developments as
evidence that contemporary globality is increasingly less west-centric
(Appiah and Gates, 1997: ix; Leclerc, 2000).

In any case, it is clear that globalization can have heterogenizing as well as
homogenizing effects. There can be, and are, many globalizations (Berger and
Huntington, 2002). Globalization can - and many argue should - be pursued
under a rainbow motif of diversity. The overall balance between cultural
divergence and convergence lies not in globality as such, but in the way that
transworld relations are handled. The social power relations that shape trans¬
planetary connections are particularly important in this regard. Thus, to the
extent that cultural imperialism afflicts contemporary history, it is largely a
problem of the voracity of western modernity rather than an outcome of
globalization per se.


Universality

A further qualification to notions of globalization as increased transworld
and supraterritorial connectivity must note that the trend has not touched all
of humanity to the same extent. Globality links people anywhere on the
planet, but it does not follow that it connects people everywhere, or every¬
where to the same degree. To repeat the earlier disclaimer, under the defini¬
tion suggested here globalization is not universalization. On the contrary, the
incidence of contemporary transplanetary connectivity has varied consider¬
ably in relation to territorial location and social status. Indeed, some people
continue to live lives that are relatively untouched by globality.



82 Framework of Analysis


In terms of territorial position, global networks have generally involved
populations of North America, Western Europe and East Asia more than
people in other world regions. For example, although McDonald’s had over
25,000 outlets in 119 countries as of June 1999, four-fifths of them were
found in just 10 countries (Watson, 2000:122-3). Variations in the intensity
of globality have also occurred among regions within countries. For example,
coastal provinces of China have undergone greater globalization than the
interior of the country. In the USA, residents of Silicon Valley have been more
enveloped in global communications than inhabitants of the Dakotas. Across
the earth, patterns of contemporary globalization have broadly followed
urban-rural lines, with cities and towns generally experiencing more trans¬
planetary connectivity than countrysides.

With regard to social position, wealthy people have on the whole accessed
transworld relations more than the poor. While those with the means rush
from their global bank to the airport lounge, hundreds of millions of low-
income people alive today have never made a telephone call. With respect to
gender, men have generally linked up to the Internet much more than women
(HDR, 1999: 62). Other patterns of uneven entry to, and benefit from, global
flows can be discerned in respect of civilization and race.

Contemporary globality has not been an exclusively Northern, urban,
elite, male, western, white preserve. At the territorial margins, for example,
transworld links have extended to remote villages in Africa (Piot, 1999;
Mendonsa, 2001). At the social margins, the homeless of Rio de Janeiro often
request a television even before they demand running water (Mariana, 2002).
Yet, although globality may have become pervasive, prevailing cultural
frameworks, resource distributions and power relationships have produced a
highly uneven spread of transplanetary and supraterritorial relations in
today’s world.

Political neutrality

The foregoing remarks concerning unequal opportunities to use and shape
transworld connections highlight the thoroughly political character of glob¬
alization. Human geography is no more politically neutral than any other
aspect of social relations like culture or economics. Space always involves
politics: processes of acquiring, distributing and exercising social power. A
social field is never a level field. Thus transplanetary and supraterritorial
connections invariably house power relations and associated power strug¬
gles, whether latent or overt. Global links are venues of conflict and cooper¬
ation, hierarchy and equality, opportunity and its denial.

Indeed, nothing in globalization is apolitical. Even seemingly tame ques¬
tions of transplanetary technical harmonization have provoked power strug¬
gles. For example, in the nineteenth century the British and French



Defining Globalization 83


governments competed to have the prime meridian (for the measure of longi¬
tudes and universal standard time) pass through their respective capitals,
with Greenwich eventually winning out. More recently, different computer
operating systems have offered users different degrees of initiative and
control (Raymond, 1999). It is illusory to think that anything in globality can
be divorced from issues of power - and thus also justice.

Any analysis of globalization must therefore examine the political aspects
involved. On the one hand, these politics involve actors: that is, power rela¬
tions among individuals, households, associations, firms and governance
organizations. In addition, the politics of globalization involve social struc¬
tures: that is, power relations between age groups, between civilizations,
between classes, between genders, between races, between people holding
different sexual orientations, and so on. Like any significant historical trend,
the growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial connections empowers
some people and disempowers others.

So, as a political process, globalization is about contests between different
interests and competing values. The spread of globality is - and cannot but be
- normatively laden and politically charged. It is important to determine
whose power rises and whose suffers under currently prevailing practices of
globalization and to consider whether alternative policies could have better
political implications.

Indeed, much of the politics of globalization is about choices. True, power¬
ful forces connected with dominant actors, deep social structures and long¬
term historical processes have promoted the recent large-scale expansion of
transplanetary and supraterritorial connectivity. However, all social actors -
including the writer and readers of this book - have opportunities (admittedly
unequal) to respond to and mould this trend.

Multiple globalizations are possible. There is nothing inevitable about the
scope, speed, direction and consequences of the trend. In particular, as
stressed earlier, globalization as a geographical process and neoliberalism as
a political project are not the same thing. Alternative paths of globalization
might be more desirable than the directions that have prevailed over the past
quarter-century. Personal and collective decisions (both active and passive)
can make a substantial difference.

These ethical choices and political moves include the way that one defines
globalization. As ever, theory and practice are inseparable. Who gets to
define globalization, and who benefits (and loses) from the resultant defini¬
tion? In particular, does a given conception of globalization help or hurt the
subordinated and the oppressed? Each definition and associated understand¬
ing of globality reflects certain interests and political positions and feeds into
struggles to sustain or alter prevailing power relations.

Hence part of the justification for the definition of globalization adopted
here must be political. To address the challenges of contemporary society



84 Framework of Analysis


people need a conception of globalization that not only provides intellectual
clarification, but also helps to make relevant, wise, responsible and empow¬
ering decisions. As the third part of this book suggests, notions of globality as
transplanetary and supraterritorial connectivity can well serve the promotion
of human security, social equality, and democracy in contemporary history.


Conclusion

This book argues that, when defined in a particular geographical fashion,
notions of ‘globality’ and ‘globalization’ can be valuable additions to the
conceptual toolkit for understanding social relations. Yes, much globe-talk of
recent years has revealed nothing new. And yes, loose thinking and careless
politics have devalued many ideas of ‘globalization’. However, these short¬
comings do not discredit the concept in every form. After all, widespread
sloppy usage of other key ideas - ‘class’, ‘democracy’, ‘rationality’ and ‘soul’,
to name but a few - has not been reason to discard these notions altogether.

On the contrary, a definition of globalization as a respatialization of social
life opens up new knowledge and engages key policy challenges of current
history in a constructively critical manner. Notions of ‘globality’ and ‘global¬
ization’ can capture, as no other vocabulary, the present ongoing large-scale
growth of transplanetary - and often also supraterritorial - connectivity.
Such an insight offers a highly promising entry point for research and action
on contemporary history.

To reiterate, this conception of globalization has a distinctive focus. It is
different from ideas of internationalization, liberalization, universalization
and westernization. The transterritorial connections of globality are different
from the inter-territorial connections of internationality. The transborder
transactions of globality are different from the open-border transactions of
liberality. The transplanetary simultaneity and instantaneity of supraterrito-
riality is different from the worldwideness of universality. The geographical
focus of globality is different from the cultural focus of western modernity.
Although globalization as defined in this book has some overlap with, and
connections to, internationalization, liberalization, universalization and
westernization, it is not equivalent to any of these older concepts and trends.

Of course, the conception of globalization elaborated in this chapter is in
no way intended to be the last word about what the term might mean. As
stressed earlier, no definition is definitive. The aim of this book is not to issue
a final pronouncement, but to offer ever-provisional ideas that provoke
further reflection, debate and, in time no doubt, another rewrite of this text.



Chapter 3

Globalization in History

Main points of this chapter

Intimations of globality: to the nineteenth century
Incipient globalization: to the mid-twentieth century
Contemporary accelerated globalization
Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• when understood as transworld connectivity, globality has figured (at
least marginally and in prototypical forms) in human history for centuries

• transplanetary relations, including some with supraterritorial qualities,
experienced growth to unprecedented levels from around the middle of
the nineteenth century

• the main, greatly accelerated rise of globality, including pronounced
supraterritorial aspects, has occurred since the middle of the twentieth
century


Where is globalization located historically? When did globality first become
part of social relations? How has globalization spread over time? How does
the extent of contemporary globality compare with the scale of earlier peri¬
ods? How far will globalization figure in future society?

Next to arguments over definition, some of the most frequent and deepest
debates about globalization concern its history. The two issues are inextrica¬
bly linked, of course. Different definitions generate different chronologies
and periodizations.

The principal debate regarding the history of globalization is whether this
development is new or old. On the one hand, proponents of a novelty thesis
assert that globalization is entirely recent. Globalists tend to adopt this posi¬
tion that contemporary society is experiencing something that no previous
time has known. In contrast, proponents of an ‘old-hat’ argument affirm that
today’s globalization repeats earlier scenarios and/or is part of far longer
historical processes. Conceptions of globalization as internationalization,
liberalization, universalization and westernization tend to hold a longer
chronology.


85




86 Framework of Analysis


If, as in this book, globalization is conceived as the spread of transplane¬
tary and more specifically supraterritorial relations between people, then the
trend has both long-term and distinctive contemporary aspects. Some pres¬
ence of globality can be traced back centuries, while greater growth of trans¬
planetary links occurred from the middle of the nineteenth century onwards,
and large-scale supraterritoriality has appeared for the first time in recent
decades. Thus today’s globalization is both old and new.

Before this three-part periodization of globalization is elaborated, several
points warrant emphasis. First, to stress once more, the historical survey
presented in this chapter reflects a particular definition of globalization.
Notions of globalization as internationalization, liberalization, universaliza¬
tion or westernization would generate different accounts of history.

Second, even definitions of globalization as the growth of transplanetary
connectivity can have different chronologies and periodizations, particularly
if those accounts do not highlight the issue of supraterritoriality to the degree
done in this book. Thus, for example, Roland Robertson has distinguished
five phases of globalization between the early fifteenth and late twentieth
centuries (1992: 58-9). For their part, David Field and Anthony McGrew
have discerned four epochs of globalization: premodern, early modern,
modern industrial, and contemporary (1999: 26).

Third, any periodization is artificially neat. In practice sociohistorical
developments cannot be divided into wholly discrete phases. Flence transi¬
tions between the three phases of globalization distinguished here have not
occurred clearly and completely at precise dates. Nevertheless, the historical
shorthand of periods provides helpful general bearings.

Fourth, although recent decades of globalization have shown progressive
acceleration, the trend is not inherently linear. In principle the growth of
transplanetary and supraterritorial relations between people could in future
slow, stall, or even reverse. However, owing to the strong forces that
currently propel globalization (as discussed in Chapter 4), most current signs
point to considerable additional increases of globality in the years to come.

Finally, a caution must be added concerning the data that are presented in
this and other chapters as evidence of the scale of globality and the pace of
globalization at various points in time. As matters currently stand, it is often
necessary to infer global connectivity from international data, with corre¬
sponding dangers of slipping into a (redundant) conception of globalization-
as-internationalization. Some of the statistics refer, for example, to
inter-national telephone calls, inter-national civil society associations, and
inter-national bank loans. Yet such figures underestimate the extent of global
connections, inasmuch as intra-national telecommunications, intra-national
civil society activities that address global issues, and intra-national electronic
finance also manifest supraterritorial qualities. Unfortunately, many estab¬
lished indicators continue to be rooted in a methodological territorialism that



Globalization in History 87


at best only partially recognizes transplanetary flows and indeed can readily
distract attention from the distinctiveness of globality in relation to interna¬
tionality.

Indeed, the development of specifically global measures is a priority for
contemporary social statistics (cf. EU, 1998). Historically, the term ‘statistics’
shares a common root with ‘state’ and has been a largely state-driven activity
(Poovey, 1998: 308). Yet today transworld as well as country-based data are
often required. For instance, global demographic mapping is needed for effec¬
tive global ecological planning. Trends of inequality in the world population
as a whole are different from trends of inequality within countries (Bhalla,
2002). However, thus far many distinctively global statistics are unavailable.

What about having a single aggregate measure of globalization? Several
researchers (like the Kearney and CSGR teams mentioned in Chapter 2) have
in recent years sought to construct a ‘globalization index’ that would permit
comparisons of levels of globalization both between countries and across
time. Yet such statistical exercises are enormously problematic, to the point
that one team of scholars has described ‘globalization as an inherently
unquantifiable metric’ (Riezman et ai, 2004: 25; also Lockwood, 2004).
Therefore, rather than rely on one measure of the trend, the following
account traces the historical growth of globality with reference to a wide
range of indicators, almost all of which have shown marked upward traject¬
ories.


Intimations of globality: to the nineteenth century

Globalization has no historical origin, in the sense of an exact starting point.
Any attempt to identify ‘the first global act’ would be arbitrary. Rather than
parachuting onto the historical stage fully matured overnight, globality grad¬
ually appeared as many intermittent and diffuse whispers.

Going back several millennia, various ancient civilizations had concep¬
tions of the world - as they knew it - as a single place. For example, the
ancient Chinese had a concept of tian xia that referred to everyone living
below heaven. Similarly, ancient Greek notions of oikoumene in the sixth and
fifth centuries bc conceived of the total habitable world as a single realm
(Heidel, 1937; Kroebner, 1945; Hannerz, 1996). Somewhere between 425
and 375 bc, Socrates and Plato affirmed that the earth was spherical rather
than flat, a principle further developed by Aristotle (Heidel, 1937: ch 7). By
the third century BC cartographers at the Alexandria Library had mapped a
world that extended from India to the Atlantic shore of Europe (Jacob, 1999).

The first (tellingly characterized) world religions emerged during the fifth
and sixth centuries BC with Zoroastrianism and Buddhism. Christians had an
incipient transplanetary notion of their prospective communion long before



88 Framework of Analysis


Isaac Watt published his hymn ‘Jesus Shall Reign Where’er the Sun’ in 1719.
Similarly, Muslim faithful of the eighth and subsequent centuries were
inspired by a vision of a transworld Islamic community, the umma.

Early intercivilizational contacts also gave a prototypical global quality to
various premodern contexts. For example, ancient Greek society developed
from a blend of Indo-European, Egyptian, Phoenician and local Aegean influ¬
ences (Bernal, 1987). More or less continuous contacts between people across
Eurasia, from China to Spain, existed from the second century AD onwards,
including along the renowned Silk Road of transcontinental commerce from
Ch’ang-an to Constantinople (McNeill, 1963: ch 7). Janet Abu-Lughod has
described a ‘world system’ of the thirteenth century that extended from
Flanders to China (J. Abu-Lughod, 1989).

Premodern intimations of globality surfaced in a number of other activities
as well. For example, a succession of ‘dollars of the Middle Ages’ served as
monies across the Mediterranean world: namely, the Byzantine solidus from
the fifth to seventh centuries; the Muslim dinar in combination with the
solidus from the eighth to the middle of the thirteenth century; and the fior-
ino of Florence during the next 150 years (Cipolla, 1956: ch2). Precursors of
‘transnational corporations’ can be seen in the banks and merchant houses of
twelfth-century Italian city-states, who maintained branches across Europe
(Braudel, 1979a: 390-5). Between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries,
these bankers also made long-distance loans to England, Flanders and the
Balkans. Prototypical global traders sold coffee between and across conti¬
nents as early as the thirteenth century. Fourteenth-century Mongol expan¬
sions from Central Asia brought bubonic plague to China, India, the Middle
East and Europe (McNeill, 1976: ch 4). At the same time several writers
including Dubois, Dante and Marsilius of Padua made proposals for supra-
state governance that would encompass at least all of Christendom (Hinsley,
1963: ch 1). Early long-distance movements of books gave hints of future
transworld communication (Febvre and Martin, 1958).

The preceding evidence suggests that globality has not, as some have
implied, been solely a feature and product of western modernity. As is argued
in Chapter 4, modern capitalism and rationalism do seem to have spurred the
greatest expansions and accelerations of globalization in contemporary
history. However, it would be wrong to say that transworld connectivity is
uniquely western and modern.

On the other hand, veritable transplanetary relations that encompass all
continents did not figure anywhere in significant measure until the middle of
the second millennium AD. A global imagination inspired voyagers in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries to attempt a circumnavigation of the earth,
a feat first accomplished in 1522. The first known globe, as a depiction of the
world, was constructed by Martin Behaim in Nuremberg in 1492 (Brotton,
1999: 75). Cartographers in Europe sketched maps of the entire planet’s



Globalization in History 89


surface starting in the sixteenth century, including the production in Venice
in 1688 of a printed globe that measured more than a metre in diameter and
included considerable detail on most of the world’s coasts (Agnew, 1998: ch
1; Wills, 2001: 9-10).

In the commercial arena, early modern times saw the slave trade ply
between Africa, the Americas and Asia, forcibly taking some 8-10.5 million
involuntary migrants across the Atlantic (Curtin, 1969: 87). The so-called
‘Columbian Exchange’ after 1492 brought a transworld diffusion of
American foodstuffs such as cassava, chocolate, potatoes and tomatoes,
while the transatlantic transfer of major diseases like smallpox, syphilis,
typhus and measles wrought devastating consequences on the Aztec, Inca and
other indigenous peoples of the Western Hemisphere (Crosby, 1972;
McNeill, 1976; Watts, 1997). Other transoceanic commerce took tea, cane
sugar, spices, tobacco, furs and precious metals across the world. To conduct
this trade the English, Dutch, French and Danish East India Companies as
well as other prototypical ‘global corporations’ maintained networks of head
offices and overseas posts.

In terms of money and finance, early modern times saw gold and silver
circulate across the globe. In the eighteenth century two merchant banks,
Hope &amp; Co and Barings, operated on stock exchanges in several countries
(Born, 1977). Meanwhile commercial houses in Amsterdam and Geneva lent
money to governments across Europe as well as to the newly founded
American federation (Cameron and Bovykin, 1991).

With such developments in trade and finance, Immanuel Wallerstein,
Fernand Braudel and others have emphasized that capitalism has from its
earliest days had transworld components (Wallerstein, 1974; Braudel,
1979b). Indeed, during the eighteenth century a number of London-based
transatlantic traders considered themselves to be ‘citizens of the world’
(Hancock, 1995). David Hume wrote, with reference to the rentier class of his
day, ‘These are men who have no connections with state, who enjoy their
revenue in any part of the globe in which they choose to reside’ (1741-2:
363). On similar lines that could have been written 200 years later, Adam
Smith declared in the concluding paragraphs of The Wealth of Nations that:

A merchant ... is in great measure indifferent. . . from what place he
carries on his trade; and a very trifling disgust will make him remove his
capital, and together with it all the industry which it supports, from one
country to another (1776:519).

Global consciousness also figured in other Enlightenment thought of the
eighteenth century. Philosophers such as A. R. J. Turgot, Johann Gottfried
Herder, and the Marquis de Condorcet were concerned with the history of
humanity as a whole, and moreover discerned a trend towards a social



90 Framework of Analysis


unification of the world (Kilminster, 1997: 262-4). Turgot, for example,
forecast that, ‘finally, commercial and political ties unite all parts of the
globe’ (1750: 41). Indeed, the Enlightenment itself was an intercontinental
movement, linking thinkers ‘from Edinburgh to Naples, Paris to Berlin,
Boston to Philadelphia’ (Gay, 1966: 3).

In respect of governance, notions of international law consolidated from
the sixteenth century onwards and advanced the premise that a single set of
secular rules should apply across the whole ‘civilized’ world. Among social
movements, anti-slavery campaigns of the eighteenth century included
transatlantic collaboration among Quakers. Meanwhile the Seven Years’
War of 1756-63 might be regarded as the first ‘world war’, with its simultan¬
eous battlefields in Europe, North America and South Asia.

However, the scale of all this proto-global activity remained very limited.
Early transplanetary commerce involved only a few articles, traded in rela¬
tively small quantities, by a handful of companies, for a tiny minority of the
world’s population. The Hudson Bay Company sent one transoceanic
message per year, while today’s large global corporations despatch thousands
of emails each day. Similarly, long-distance financial dealings of early
modern times were quite rare and invariably had a bilateral character, linking
financiers in one country with a client in a second country. Global conscious¬
ness touched relatively few minds of these earlier times, and even for that
small minority globality was usually a passing intuition rather than a central
well-developed conception.

Moreover, other forms of global connectivity did not figure in human
history at all before the nineteenth century. There were no anthropogenic
transworld ecological changes like global warming or ozone depletion. No
global institutions were available for an effective transplanetary implementa¬
tion of global regulations. No global postal services or telecommunications
operated. True, a few creative minds of the sixteenth century were already
beginning to imagine the possibility of supraterritorial communication.
Shakespeare’s Puck in A Midsummer Night’s Dream thought to ‘put a girdle
round the earth in forty minutes’ (1595-6: 38), while Mother Shipton of
Yorkshire prophesied that ‘around the world thought will fly, in the twink¬
ling of an eye’ (Young, 1991:1). However, actual global communication as it
is experienced today was not in the picture.

Indeed, supraterritoriality was absent from the incipient globality
described above. Money and finance of early capitalist development did not
have qualities of simultaneous and instantaneous exchanges involving any
place on earth. For example, although the speed was remarkable for its time,
it still took a number of days for financial panic to travel several hundred kilo¬
metres between London and Amsterdam in 1745 and between London and
Paris in 1825 (Neal, 1985). Nor were the early global products distributed,
priced and sold in the context of a tightly coordinated transworld marketing



Globalization in History 91


strategy. Hence, to the extent that transplanetary connections existed before
the nineteenth century, they unfolded entirely in territorial space.


Incipient globalization: to the mid-twentieth century

Substantially increased transplanetary links - including some with a distinc¬
tively supraterritorial quality - developed during the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. The hundred years after 1850 saw the advent of major
new global communications technologies, a multiplication and consolidation
of global markets, increased elements of global finance, two ‘world wars’,
and a degree of supraterritorial connectivity in certain organizations. Indeed,
the global swine flu epidemic of 1918-19 afflicted numbers of people (50
million deaths) comparable to the global scourge of AIDS today (20 million
dead to date).

However, the two periods of globalization are different. In scale, quality
and impact, globalization of the nineteenth century cannot be likened to the
hugely accelerated rise of intense transplanetary connectivity that has
unfolded since the middle of the twentieth century. Most of the relevant
statistics for the nineteenth century show far smaller numbers. Indeed,
transworld production chains and significant anthropogenic global ecologi¬
cal problems were altogether absent from the earlier time. Nor did nine¬
teenth-century globality have anything like the degree of supraterritoriality
that marks the present day.

Communications

Global communications grew in the nineteenth century as never before.
Transworld postal services consolidated. Distance-conquering transoceanic
telegraph lines spread from the 1850s. Cross-border telephone connections
and radio communications developed from the 1890s.

The telegraph, invented in 1837, provided the first means of substantially
supraterritorial communication. Submarine telegraph cables became avail¬
able in the early 1850s across several seas within Europe. A transatlantic tele¬
graph link came permanently into use from 1866. Five years later telegraph
lines stretched continuously between Australia, China, Europe and Japan,
although the first transpacific cable did not become operational until 1903
(Ahvenainen, 1981). With these connections, information could circle the
planet in a few days rather than a month. Several press agencies like Reuters
were formed to take advantage of these opportunities. The telegraph’s signif¬
icance for the rise of supraterritoriality was presciently articulated at mid¬
century by the novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne, who exclaimed through one of
his characters that ‘by means of electricity, the world of matter has become a



92 Framework of Analysis


great nerve, vibrating thousands of miles in a breathless point of time’ (1851:
273).

The late nineteenth century also introduced distanceless voice communi¬
cation via the telephone, invented in 1876. The first telephone calls between
countries became possible with a line connecting London and Paris in 1891.
Two-way telephone messages across the Atlantic Ocean were first achieved
via radio waves in 1926. During the next five years radio telephony also came
to link Buenos Aires with Madrid, Batavia (now Jakarta) with Amsterdam,
and London with Cape Town, Sydney and Auckland. By 1933 an advertise¬
ment of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T) could
justifiably claim that ‘the world is bound together by telephone’ (Young,
1991).

As for radio, the first wireless transmission between countries occurred in
1899, across the English Channel. A transatlantic radio signal was success¬
fully received for the first time in 1901. World services on the wireless deve¬
loped from 1924. The first veritably transplanetary radio event occurred in
January 1930, when the speech of King George V to open the London Naval
Conference was relayed simultaneously to 242 radio stations spread across
six continents. By the mid-1930s the world counted 57 million radio
receivers, more than 1,100 radio stations, and 1,354 international radio
programmes (Huth, 1937).

That said, until the mid-twentieth century global communications were
quite limited on the whole. Early transworld telegraphy and telephony had
relatively slow speeds, very low capacities, notoriously poor reliability, and
extremely high costs. For example, in the late nineteenth century telegraphic
messages between Australia and Europe took several days to be relayed; and
a message of 20 words cost £10, five times the average weekly wage of that
time. The price of a telephone call from London to New York in 1927 was
almost a thousand times higher in real terms than the rate prevailing in 1996
(FT, 23 December 1996: 17). Matters improved with the introduction of
coaxial cables in the 1930s, but the fax machine exhibited at the World’s Fair
of 1939 required eighteen minutes to transmit a single sheet of paper
(Gelernter, 1995). Although television was invented in 1926, the broadcasts
remained localized until the 1960s. The digital computer first appeared in
1946, but computer networks were unknown before 1969.

Travel

The nineteenth century also brought global movements of people on an
unprecedented scale. The 50 years after 1850 saw the creation of major new
diasporas, as about 50 million people migrated from India and China to vari¬
ous destinations in the tropics, while around the same number made perma¬
nent moves from Europe to the Americas, Australasia and South Africa



Globalization in History 93


(Lewis, 1978: 14). Indeed, passports and tight surveillance of cross-border
movements of people were in their infancy at this time (Torpey, 2000).

Temporary transworld travel also increased in this period. For example,
black vocal choirs from the USA toured Europe, and the pioneering travel
agent Thomas Cook led his first round-the-globe excursion in 1872. The first
world fair, drawing exhibits from across the planet, was staged in London in
1851. The modern Olympic Games were launched in Athens in 1896. The baj
drew tens of thousands of pilgrims to Mecca annually in the 1920s.

Several key developments in global infrastructure abetted this greater
transworld mobility. The Suez and Panama Canals, completed in 1867 and
1903 respectively, greatly reduced the length of many transoceanic voyages,
as did the introduction of steamships in place of sail. Concurrently, large-
scale railway construction greatly facilitated transcontinental travel. The
early twentieth century saw the advent of mechanized air transport. Airmail
services began in 1918, and the first nonstop transatlantic flight was achieved
in 1919. By 1957 more passengers crossed the Atlantic by aeroplane than by
ship. A team of pilots crossed the Eurasian landmass from Amsterdam to
Batavia in just over four days in 1933. In 1942 a recently defeated candidate
for the US presidency could experience what he called ‘one world’ by flying
around the planet in 160 hours (Willkie, 1943).

However, Wendell Willkie had very small company with his jet lag in the
1940s. The 1896 Athens Olympiad involved only several dozen athletes from
a few countries and attracted minimal press coverage (MacAloon, 1981: ch
7). Early global tourism was undertaken by only handfuls of people. Package
holidays - which spurred the idea that anyone could take vacations anywhere
in the world - were not introduced until 1949. Although the liquid-fuelled
rocket was invented in 1927, intercontinental missiles did not arrive on the
scene until 30 years later.

Markets

Next to transworld communications and transworld travel, the period of
incipient globalization also saw unprecedented growth of transplanetary
commodity markets and global brand names. In terms of primary commodi¬
ties, for example, a prototypical global market in copper consolidated from
the 1850s onwards, interlinking shipments from Australia, Chile, Cuba,
England and the USA. The London Metal Exchange (LME), established in
1876, handled any deal in copper, tin, lead and zinc, wherever on earth the
supplies originated and regardless of whether the cargoes ever landed on
British soil (EIU, 1957). Global pricing dynamics also developed at this time
in respect of grains and cotton, especially between the commodities
exchanges at Buenos Aires, Cairo, Calcutta, Chicago, Liverpool, New York,
Rio de Janeiro and Winnipeg (Baer and Saxon, 1949).



94 Framework of Analysis


Global markets in brandname packaged goods also started to emerge in the
late nineteenth century, aided by the creation of automated bottling, canning
and refrigeration processes. For example, products such as Campbell Soup
and Heinz foods became household articles across several countries from the
mid-1880s. Coca-Cola was marketed in Britain, Canada, Cuba, Mexico and
the USA within 20 years of the drink’s introduction in 1886. Office equipment
from Remington Typewriter, agricultural machinery from International
Harvester, and appliances from Western Electric also began to be marketed
between and across continents from the late nineteenth century. By the 1880s
Singer covered three-quarters of the world market in sewing machines
(Chandler, 1986: 415-16). With the expansion of colonial settlement and
other transoceanic migration during this period, expatriates from Europe,
Asia and North America took their demand for ‘home’ products with them to
all corners of the earth. In 1899 J. Walter Thompson was the first advertising
agency to open an office outside its country of origin, presaging the develop¬
ment of global commercial promotion campaigns (Mattelart, 1989: 3).

The range of global products continued to grow in the early twentieth
century. Transworld marketing was started for Bayer aspirin, Gillette razors,
National Cash Register and Otis Elevator. From the outset in 1908, Henry
Ford regarded his best-selling automobile, the Model T, as a ‘world car’
(Spybey, 1996: 41). By 1929 Coca-Cola was bottled in 27 countries and sold
in 78 lands. The supraterritorial character of the beverage was explicitly
recognized during World War II, when it was promoted as ‘the global high-
sign’ (Pendergrast, 1993). The basis for other well-known global products
was laid with the arrival of Nescafe in 1938, the long-play phonograph in
1948, the Marlboro cowboy in 1954, and the first McDonald’s restaurant in
1955.

Global markets in primary products also developed further in the first half
of the twentieth century. While the LME and other commodities exchanges
continued their operations, governments took the first initiatives (via multi¬
lateral commodity agreements) to establish transworld price controls on
certain products, including sugar, coffee, rubber and tin. During World War
II, the Allies created a number of so-called Combined Boards for the global
coordination of production and distribution of several dozen strategic raw
materials and manufactures. After the war an International Emergency Food
Council briefly operated a global programme to combat world hunger in
1946-7.

However, the globalization of markets prior to the mid-twentieth century
must not be overestimated. Products with transplanetary distribution and
sale were few in number at this time. Moreover, even in these limited cases,
marketing strategies lacked the tight transworld coordination that became
possible in the past half-century with digital computers, advanced telecom¬
munications, and electronic mass media.



Globalization in History 95


Money and finance

An incipient globalization of money and finance also occurred in the nine¬
teenth and early twentieth centuries. The sterling-based gold standard that
prevailed from around 1870 to 1914 gave certain national currencies
transworld circulation (De Cecco, 1974). The British pound was the prime
global money of this day, but the Dutch guilder, the Japanese yen, the
Mexican silver dollar and other denominations also figured in some trade and
finance that were not directly connected to their ‘home’ jurisdictions. An
employee of the American Express Company invented the traveller’s cheque
in 1890 (Mandell, 1990: 28). After the disruptions of World War I, a gold
exchange standard was incompletely and temporarily restored in the 1920s.
That said, foreign exchange trading during this phase of globalization was
minute compared to the levels of recent decades, and governments held small
foreign exchange reserves. By the end of 1913, official foreign exchange hold¬
ings across the globe had a total value of only around $1 billion (Cohen,
1977: 284), as compared with $1,600 billion in 1997 (BIS, 1998: 105).

Money became almost completely territorialized between the 1930s and
the 1950s. True, a number of countries were at this time associated with the
so-called sterling bloc or the dollar bloc. In addition, as colonies many other
lands had their money closely linked to the currency of a distant metropole.
However, these arrangements applied to rigidly bordered regional and imper¬
ial territories, not to the planet as a whole.

Indeed, even under the two gold standards most money was shipped in
paper and metal form over territorial distances and across territorial borders.
Apart from limited sums of money wired by telegraph, currencies at this
earlier time lacked the supraterritorial mobility made possible on a large scale
later in the twentieth century by airborne shipments and transworld elec¬
tronic fund transfers. Nor did incipient globalization involve distinct supra-
state monies (like the SDR), global bank passes or global credit cards.

In finance, the gold standard and colonialism encouraged a number of
commercial banks to develop overseas branch networks. On the eve of World
War I, British-based institutions held between a quarter and a third of all
bank deposits in countries including Argentina, Australia, Brazil and New
Zealand (Jones, 1993: 40). The major banks of the day lent large sums across
borders and suffered an international debt crisis in the 1870s when a world
economic downturn stopped many repayments. Indeed, the first Latin
American debt crisis for European banks occurred in the 1820s.

However, global banking of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
was heavily constrained by territorial distance and borders. Apart from expa¬
triate colonials, very few people maintained bank accounts outside their
country of residence. Offshore banking facilities did not appear (and then
only on a small scale) until Luxembourg passed relevant legislation in 1929,



96 Framework of Analysis


followed by Guernsey in 1936, and Jersey and the Netherlands Antilles in
1940. In the 1930s wealthy Canadian and US citizens also started to use the
Bahamas to locate offshore trusts and holding companies (Hampton, 1996).

A more pronounced global debt dynamic (that is, one that potentially
encompasses places anywhere on earth and has transworld effects) emerged
after World War I. The German state owed huge reparations to the Allies,
who among themselves owed some $26.5 billion in war debt, much of it to the
USA, which in turn made substantial loans to Germany in order to facilitate
reparations payments. A string of multilateral conferences grappled with this
complex web of transworld financial obligations from 1920 until all war
debts and reparations were cancelled in 1932. However, globally syndicated
commercial bank loans were not known at this time.

In securities markets, meanwhile, the gold standard facilitated a prolifera¬
tion of foreign bond issues in the late nineteenth century. For example, bonds
issued in Europe funded much of the California Gold Rush as well as railway
construction in the Americas, China and Russia. In total, the tsarist regime in
Russia borrowed some $1.5 trillion in present-day US dollar values on the
Paris bond market between 1880 and 1913.

In regard to stocks, listings of nonresident companies figured (as a propor¬
tion of total quotations) as significantly on the Amsterdam and London stock
exchanges in the 1870s as they did in the 1980s (Neal, 1985: 226). On the
other hand, no amount of discounting for inflation could take the £5 billion
worth of externally listed shares in world finance of the late nineteenth
century anywhere close to the figure of several trillion pounds today.

In any case, such securities transactions of the nineteenth century had a
distinctly bilateral, international character. That is, savers in one country
invested in a second country using the currency of either the originating or the
receiving country. The transactions involved no global syndicates of fund
managers, no global pool of investors, and no global portfolios. Moreover,
brokers lacked the technology for instantaneous transworld trading. Nor
were electronic global clearing and settlement systems available.

In short, some money and finance obtained certain global features in the
period 1870-1914. These characteristics resurfaced to a limited extent and
temporarily during the 1920s. However, these monetary and financial trans¬
actions retained a heavily territorial character. They occurred for the most
part between country units and under major constraints of distance and
borders.


Organizations

Incipient global communications, travel, markets, money and finance
encouraged - and were at the same time encouraged by - the formation of
prototypical global organizations in the nineteenth and early twentieth



Globalization in History 97


centuries. These institutions included a number of market actors, regulatory
agencies (covered below under the heading of law), and civil society bodies.

In terms of firms, the cross-border activities of certain banks, mining
companies, agricultural businesses and manufacturers have already been
mentioned. A few industrial concerns began not only to sell their goods across
several countries in the nineteenth century, but also to establish subsidiaries
to pursue production outside the base country. In the first such instance, the
US-based gun maker Colt opened a factory in Britain in 1852 (Stopford and
Strange, 1991:13). Similarly, Siemens of Germany built a facility in Russia in
1855, and Kikkoman of Japan set up soy sauce manufacture in the USA in
1892 (Jones, 1996). By the early twentieth century several hundred firms
operated across colonial empires or in several state jurisdictions at once. On
the other hand, these companies did not pursue global production chains, in
the sense that different stages of a process were sited at widely dispersed loca¬
tions.

More civil society associations, too, began to acquire incipient global
features between the nineteenth and mid-twentieth century. For example, a
number of Christian missionary societies and several Islamic revival move¬
ments coordinated their respective proselytization efforts across several
continents at this time. The World Zionist Congress was formed in 1897.
Transatlantic peace movements held a sequence of meetings in the 1840s
and again around the turn of the century (Beales, 1931; Calvocoressi, 1987).
Frequent cross-border consultations also transpired towards in the later
nineteenth century among campaigners for women’s suffrage (Berkovitch,
1999). Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association encom¬
passed over 900 chapters across five continents in the mid-1920s (Leanne,
1994: 86-9). The labour movement maintained its First International in
1864-72, a Second International in 1889-1914, and a Third International
(the Comintern) in 1919-43. By 1914 unions had set up more than two
dozen International Trade Secretariats to support workers in particular
industries (Lorwin, 1953; Holthoon and Linden, 1988; Silver, 2003).
Meanwhile business circles founded the International Chamber of
Commerce in 1920. In the area of humanitarian relief the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement dates back to 1863, while the Save the
Children Fund was started in 1919. In respect of environmentalism, the first
cross-border initiatives at wildlife conservation were taken around the turn
of the century (McCormick, 1989). Also early in the twentieth century,
Mahatma Gandhi took his campaigns for social transformation to South
Africa, India and Britain.

However, like the regulatory bodies discussed below, all of these proto¬
typical global firms and civil society associations lacked much supraterrito-
rial character. In general, they operated between countries rather than
across the globe as a single place. The territorially based members of the



98 Framework of Analysis


organization (that is, company affiliates or branch associations) maintained
a high degree of autonomy from any global head office. Indeed, the global
communications infrastructure of the time was not adequate to conduct
tightly coordinated transworld campaigns and policies. Moreover, these
prototypical global organizations had heavily restricted mobility, with
limited possibilities to relocate offices and facilities to other places in the
world.


Military

Globalization of military activity was increasingly evident after the middle of
the nineteenth century in, for example, the so-called ‘new imperialism’ of
greatly enlarged overseas colonial empires. Half a dozen West European
states were joined in the 1890s by the USA in maintaining large military
garrisons thousands of kilometres from their respective capitals. American
and Spanish armies fought in the Philippines, Belgian soldiers in the Congo,
British troops in Afghanistan, Dutch military in what would become
Indonesia, French forces in West Africa, German units in East Africa.

Military campaigns of unprecedented transworld scope came in the first
half of the twentieth century with the aptly named ‘world wars’. The major
combatant states coordinated operations across theatres in Africa, Asia,
Europe and the Pacific. In terms of global weaponry, World War II saw the
arrival of radar and long-distance bomber aircraft. In 1945 VI and V2 rock¬
ets fired by German forces on London introduced long-range missiles into
battle (Neufeld, 1995).

Law

The nineteenth century brought expanded globality in the legal field, too.
Inter-state treaties increased to unprecedented numbers at this time, and
more of them took a multilateral rather than bilateral form. Over 20 times as
many multilateral accords were concluded in the period 1851-1950 as in the
period 1751-1850 (Ku, 2001: 4). Multilateral conference diplomacy also
intensified after 1815, with some congresses like those of Berlin in 1884-5
and Paris in 1919 addressing far-flung parts of the planet.

The second half of the nineteenth century witnessed the creation of the first
permanent regulatory agencies with a transplanetary remit (Murphy, 1994).
These bodies included the International Telegraph (now Telecommunication)
Union (ITU), founded in 1865, and the General (now Universal) Postal
Union, founded in 1874. Systematic transworld monitoring of disease began
following major cholera outbreaks in the 1840s, with the first multilateral
scientific conference on transboundary disease in 1851. Institutions for
transworld tracking of weather also emerged before the turn of the century.



Globalization in History 99


Important global standards were set during this period as well.
Arrangements for universal time coordination (UTC) in relation to a prime
meridian at Greenwich were concluded in 1884. Institutionalized transworld
technical standardization began with the establishment of the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) in 1906. The International Organization
for Standardization, source of the now pervasive ISO numbers, started oper¬
ations in 1947.

In the 1920s and 1930s the League of Nations developed an unprece¬
dented breadth - if perhaps still relatively shallow depth - of transworld
governance. Interpol launched its transborder pursuit of lawbreakers in
1923. The formation of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in 1930
introduced the first multilateral institution devoted specifically to monitoring
transborder financial flows. The basis for still larger expansion of global
governance was laid in the 1940s with the creation of the UN system, the
Bretton Woods institutions (the IMF and the World Bank), and the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).


Consciousness

All of the above incipient material globalization helped to spread global
thinking to more contexts and to wider circles of people from the nineteenth
century onwards. Newly created mass-circulation newspapers also began to
bring information from around the planet within easy reach of literate people
everywhere.

Meanwhile prototypical global organizations gave expression to, and in
turn deepened, a sense of transplanetary community in various circles.
Supraterritorial religious and labour solidarities have already been
mentioned. In addition, the late nineteenth century witnessed several projects
to foster transworld racial solidarity. For instance, white Anglo-Saxon imper¬
ial federalism gathered adherents across the British Empire in the 1870s and
1880s, and the first intercontinental Pan-African Congress was held in 1893.
Meanwhile first-generation feminists of the late nineteenth and early twenti¬
eth centuries developed some transworld solidarity based on gender. In this
vein the writer Virginia Woolf made her renowned declaration that: ‘As a
woman I want no country. As a woman my country is the whole world’
(1938:197).

Global thinking continued to surface during this period in other literary
and academic circles as well. In the early nineteenth century the social theor¬
ist Claude-Henri de Saint-Simon proclaimed a ‘religion of humanity’ that
was promoted inter alia through a Parisian newspaper by the name of Le
Globe (Taylor, 1975: 51). Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels recognized a
global dimension in capitalism, writing in The Communist Manifesto of a
‘universal inter-dependence of nations’ (1848: 64). Pioneer sociologists like



100 Framework of Analysis


Summary chronology of incipient globalization,

1850s-1950s

1851 first world’s fair

1852 establishment of the first foreign manufacturing subsidiary

1863 start of the first transworld relief organization

1864 creation of the first transworld labour organization

1865 formation of the first global governance agency

1866 first permanent transoceanic telegraph cable

1870 emergence of the first trans world monetary regime

1872 first round-the-world tourist excursion

1890 invention of the traveller’s cheque

1891 first cross-border telephone connection
1896 first global sports event, the Athens Olympiad
1899 first cross-border radio transmission

1918 inaugurationof airmail

1919 first nonstop transatlantic flight

1920 inauguration of the League of Nations
1926 first transatlantic telephone call

1929 first offshore banking arrangements

1930 formation of the Bank for International Settlements

1944 creation of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank

1945 V1 and V2 ballistic missiles fired from Germany on London
1945 formation of the United Nations system

1947 signing of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
1949 first package holiday

1951 first international credit card

1952 first scheduled jet airline service
1954 advent of the Marlboro cowboy
1956 first transoceanic telephone cable


Emile Durkheim and Leonard Hobhouse also made perceptive observations
of emergent globality (Scholte, 1993: 21). One or two researchers of the late
nineteenth century had premonitions of transborder ecological problems
like acid rain and global warming (McCormick, 1989: 182; Myers, 1996:
1). Over 50,000 precious stones were assembled to form a Globe of Jewels
(using emeralds for sea and rubies for land) in Iran in 1869. Efforts to chart
a global star map began in 1890, involving twelve observatories across
the earth (although the complete catalogue of the heavens was not
published until 1964) (Daston, 1999). Esperanto was introduced in 1887
to answer a newly perceived need for a distinctly global language that tran¬
scended territorial locations. In 1926 the Fabian Society in London saw fit




Globalization in History 101


to convene a series of lectures on ‘The Shrinking World’ (Toynbee, 1948:
97). A few years later Jose Ortega y Gasset declared that ‘the content of
existence for the average man of to-day includes the whole planet’ (1930:
29).

That said, global consciousness was at this time not central to everyday
life. Few people attended the Fabian lectures, and almost no one spoke
Esperanto. Indeed, a UNESCO survey conducted in 1962 estimated that 70
per cent of the world’s population was unaware of happenings beyond the
village (Connor, 1994: 27). Relatively few people acted out a strong sense of
global class, gender, racial or religious solidarity. Territorial identities, espec¬
ially those linked to state and nation, tended to sweep aside all other construc¬
tions of community.

The evidence reviewed in the summary box on the preceding page clearly
indicates that globality - as transplanetary connectivity - took many forms
and reached substantially greater extents in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries than ever before. Moreover, this period also saw certain
global relations - like radio, a handful of brandname goods, and a few regu¬
latory arrangements - acquire something of a supraterritorial quality.
However, as the next section shows, it is quite something else to suggest - as
some observers have asserted - that contemporary globalization repeats the
scale and significance of trends a hundred years earlier.


Contemporary accelerated globalization

So, if conceived as the growth of transplanetary - and more specifically
supraterritorial - spaces, then globalization has unfolded mainly since the
mid-twentieth century. Although transworld relations are not completely
novel, the pace and scale of their expansion has become qualitatively greater
over the past five decades. These years have seen far and away the greatest
increases in the number, variety, intensity and influence of global social
phenomena. To take one general indicator, the rigorously calculated CSGR
Globalization Index for the world as a whole shows an impressive rise from
0.18 in 1982 to 0.40 in 2001 (CSGR, 2005).

Communications

Some of the most striking contemporary accelerations of globalization have
occurred in respect of communications, especially those of an electronic
supraterritorial kind (Cairncross, 1997; Mowlana, 1997). The relevant infra¬
structure has vastly grown since the mid-twentieth century. Transoceanic
cables became available for telephone as well as telegraph messages from
1956, when the first such link connected Scotland and Newfoundland. Direct



102 Framework of Analysis


dialling between countries was introduced between London and Paris in
1963, the same year that a ‘hot line’ was installed in the spirit of detente
between the Kremlin and the White House. By 1990 transworld direct-dial
telephony was available in over 200 countries.

Over the same period the introduction of satellites has hugely increased the
carrying capacities of the global communications infrastructure. Orbital
satellites became available in 1958, followed by geostationary satellites
(which hold a fixed position above the earth) in 1963. AT&amp;T launched the
first telecommunications satellite in 1962. The International
Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), founded in 1964,
today links more than 20 orbitals with thousands of earth stations in over 200
countries (INTELSAT, 2005). In addition, other operators between them
maintain some 150 further communications satellites (Demac, 1986).

Meanwhile optical fibres have offered ever-rising capacities for global
communications since their invention in the late 1960s. The maximum load
of a single strand of fibre-optic cable increased to 6,000 simultaneous voice
conversations by the early 1980s and 600,000 concurrent telephone calls by
the mid-1990s. The introduction since the 1980s of broadband technologies
such as Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) and very high-speed
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) has allowed fibre-optic cables to carry
not only voice, but also large concentrations of digitized data, text, sound
recordings, graphic material, and motion pictures. Several transoceanic and
transcontinental fibre-optic cables have been laid since 1988. Whereas the
submarine telephone cable laid in 1956 could carry a maximum of 60 calls
simultaneously, the Fibreoptic Link Around the Globe (FLAG) constructed in
1996-2002 can transmit up to 600,000 conversations concurrently. Another
major project, the Global Crossing fibre-optic network, has connected more
than 200 cities across the planet with over 100,000 miles of cable. Given the
enormous capacities offered by satellites and fibre optics, cross-border tele¬
phone traffic burgeoned from 33 billion minutes in 1990 to 70 billion
minutes in 1998 (HDR, 1999: 25).

Telephone connection points have likewise proliferated in the past half-
century. The 1965 world total of 150 million fixed lines rose to 851 million
by 1998. Moderately priced fax machines came on the market in the mid-
1980s and numbered nearly 30 million worldwide by the mid-1990s. More
recent developments in telephony include videophones and videoconferenc¬
ing technology.

In addition, reduced costs and improved performance have turned mobile
telephones into a mass consumer good. The world count of these devices
increased from less than a million in 1985 to 700 million at the end of 2000
and over a billion in 2004 (FT, 8 October 1998: VIII; FT, 8 October 1999:
VIII; FT, 20 June 2001:13). The late 1990s saw the introduction of satellite-
based mobile telephone systems in which a handset can be reached instantly



Globalization in History 103


with a single telephone number at any location on earth. New generations of
mobiles have acquired a wider menu of capacities, for example, to convey
text, fax, email and image as well as voice messages.

Recent developments in the global telecommunications infrastructure
have also created large supraterritorial spaces for computer networks. The
first transoceanic computer link, using a telex connection, was achieved in
1963. Communication between dispersed computer networks occurred for
the first time in 1969, in the so-called ARPANET between researchers at four
universities in the western USA. Email was introduced through ARPANET
three years later. Company-wide so-called ‘intranets’ have grown since the
late 1980s to coordinate production and sales operations, wherever on the
planet the various bureaux and employees might be situated. Other key
events in the development of global computer networks have included the
introduction of commercial silicon microchips in 1971, personal computers
(PCs) in 1981, and portable laptops shortly thereafter.

The publicly accessible Internet, a transworld ‘meganetwork’ linking
millions of individual computers, emerged in the 1980s and quickly under¬
went enormous expansion. The number of computer systems connected to
the Internet (or ‘hosts’) burgeoned from 213 in 1981 to 313,000 in 1990 and
318,000,000 in 2005 (ISC, 2005). Estimates of current and projected Internet
use vary widely; however, a fair guess calculates that 934 million people
across the world were online by 2004 (CIA, 2004). Internet take-up has been
faster than that of any previous communications technology.

The Internet has also developed a graphical dimension, the so-called
World Wide Web, which became available for general public use in 1991.
The millions of supraterritorial ‘sites’ on the Web provide near-instantaneous
access to all manner of information for readers anywhere on earth. The
search engine Google covered more than 8 billion web pages as of 2005
(Google, 2005).

Like computer networks, supraterritorial communications via television
are new to contemporary accelerated globalization. Transoceanic television
transmissions via satellite were first achieved in 1962. The first live satellite
television broadcast occurred in respect of a concert by the Beatles in 1967.
Since then, hundreds of millions of people have simultaneously watched
other global events such as championship sports, moon landings, and war
reports. The number of television receivers across the planet rose from 75
million in 1956 (the first year of mass production of affordable sets) to 1,400
million in 1997 (Brown, 1990: 115; UNESCO, 1999: IV.S.3). Television
density nearly doubled from 121 per 1,000 people worldwide in 1980 to 235
per 1,000 in 1995 (HDR, 1999: 4). Only one state, Bhutan, has attempted to
exclude television from its jurisdiction, and even this government relented
and legalized the medium in 1999. Television transmissions via direct broad¬
cast satellite (DBS), first achieved in 1976, have taken the additional step of



104 Framework of Analysis


bypassing earth stations and beaming signals straight to individual dwellings
via parabolic rooftop dishes. Global television stations such as Cable News
Network (CNN), BBC World, and Al-Jazeera have multiplied since the
1980s. CNN now transmits to over 200 countries and other territories.

With respect to an older global mass medium, the world count of radio sets
increased dramatically to over 2.4 billion in 1997, more than 40 times the
level of the 1930s (UNESCO, 1999: IV.S.3). The transistor radio, introduced
in 1955, has offered greater portability and much improved reception. More
recently, digital radios that receive satellite transmissions are opening new
opportunities for low-cost, high-capacity global broadcasting. The amount
of world service programmes by major government-sponsored radio stations
doubled between 1960 and 1988, to a total of some 16,000 hours per week
(UNESCO, 1989: 154). Incalculable additional amounts of globally relayed
information have been broadcast through local and national radio stations.


Travel

Transplanetary movements of people have likewise grown to unprecedented
levels since the middle of the twentieth century. Much-enlarged infrastruc¬
tures of paved roads and air corridors have coupled with pre-existent
transcontinental railways and transworld shipping lanes to make global
travel more available than ever. The average number of people crossing state
frontiers across the world per day rose from 69,000 in 1950 to over two
million in 2000 (French, 2000: 6).

The decades since 1960 have brought massive increases in the numbers of
aeroplanes, airports, routes and flights. The speed, range and carrying capa¬
cities of the craft have improved with the advent of commercial jets in the late
1950s, wide-body aircraft in 1969, and supersonic carriers in the early 1970s.
Jet engines have given something of a supraterritorial quality to air travel,
connecting almost any points on earth to one another within 24 hours. The
world total of air traffic between countries grew from 25 million passengers
per annum in 1950 to over 400 million in 1996. The number of air travellers
flying within as well as between countries on scheduled commercial flights
reached nearly 1.5 billion per annum in 1997 (ICAO, 1998). Passenger kilo¬
meters flown on scheduled airlines rose from 1.8 trillion in 1991 to 2.9 tril¬
lion in 2001 (ICAO, 2003).

With aircraft and other means of cross-border transport, people took 425
million holidays abroad in 1990, a figure that rose to 693 million in 2001 and
is expected to reach 937 million by 2010 (FT, 7 January 1997: VII; WTO-1,
2002). Total receipts from travel between countries rose twenty-fold from
$19 billion in 1970 to $389 billion in 1996, thus at rates far ahead of world
GDP growth (WTO-1,1991: 11; UN, 1997: 184).

Meanwhile large numbers of people have made longer-term transworld



Globalization in History 105


movements. Between voluntary migrants and involuntary refugees, around
100-120 million people resided outside their country of citizenship as of the
early 1990s (Sutcliffe, 1998: 325; Stalker, 2000: 7). Nearly four million
Filipina domestic workers are currently employed in 130 countries across the
planet (Hawkesworth, 2003: 51; also Parrenas, 2001). Remittances from
migrant labourers (totalling $88 billion from North to South in 2002) consti¬
tute a significant proportion of GDP in several countries (UN, 2002).
Moreover, transworld movements of professionals from South to North have
created a ‘brain drain’ of tens of thousands per year (Stalker, 2000: 107).
Study abroad has become fairly commonplace in higher education, involving
an estimated 1.5 million people in 1993 (Stalker, 2000: 108). A new pheno¬
menon of transworld (often airborne) asylum seekers emerged in the 1980s
and reached a peak flow of 700,000 to the European OECD countries in
1992, before declining to 300,000 three years later (Castles and Miller, 1998:
88-9).

That said, heavy state-imposed restrictions have severely limited many
global movements of people, particularly those involving low-skilled labour.
In this vein, a Ugandan recently despaired that ‘obtaining a visa from the
British High Commission [in Kampala] is harder than getting into heaven’
(UMU, 2003).

Organizations

Not surprisingly, growth in global communications and travel has gone hand
in hand with growth in global organizations since the 1960s. This rise of glob-
ality has occurred not only in terms of the numbers of institutions that have a
transplanetary field of activities, but also in terms of the degree of supraterri-
torial mobility and coordination that marks their operations.

In the business sector, the count of firms that work simultaneously in
several countries multiplied more than ninefold from 7,000 in the late 1960s
to 61,000 (with over 900,000 foreign affiliates between them) in 2003. Total
world stock of FDI went from $68 billion in 1960 to $1,700 billion in 1990
and $7,100 billion in 2002 (UNCTAD, 1994: 131; UNCTAD, 2003: 1;
UNCTAD, 2004: 8). Along with global organization through direct invest¬
ment, companies have also formed thousands of transworld strategic
alliances, particularly since the 1980s (Gilroy, 1993; Dunning, 1997).
Organized crime syndicates like the Columbia-based Medellin cartel and the
China-based Triads have added further to the volume of transworld ‘busi¬
ness’. The current collective annual income of these globally operating mafias
may be as high as $1.5 trillion (HDR, 1999: 42; Mittelman and Johnston,
1999).

At the same time as proliferating in quantity, contemporary corporate
connections have also become more deeply global in quality. For one thing,



106 Framework of Analysis


transplanetary communications have permitted much more intensive
supraterritorial coordination of contemporary business operations. In addi¬
tion, FDI today has much greater transworld mobility, with companies more
ready and able to relocate facilities within a global space. In one striking
example, athletic suppliers Nike during a five-year period closed 20 factories
and opened 35 others at new sites often thousands of miles away (Abegglen,
1994:26).

Like the expansion of cross-border firms, the greatest historical prolifera¬
tion and growth of cross-border civil society organizations (CSOs) has also
transpired since 1960. Of the more than 20,000 active bodies of this kind
counted by the Union of International Associations in 2000, less than 10 per
cent were over 40 years old (UIA, 1998:1764;UIA, 2001:33,35). In this light
Lester Salamon (1994: 109) has spoken of: ‘a global “associational revolu¬
tion” that may prove to be as significant to the latter twentieth century as the
rise of the nation-state was to the latter nineteenth’.

Countless further transworld associations (like many newsgroups on the
Internet) have had a less formal and more transient character. For example,
Peoples’ Global Action against ‘Free’ Trade and the World Trade
Organization (PGA) promoted public demonstrations against the WTO in
the late 1990s as a loose transplanetary network without offices or officers.


Law

Global governance agencies have likewise grown at unprecedented rates in
recent decades. The increase in the number of these organizations has been
relatively modest, since many transworld regulatory bodies were created in
the period of incipient globalization. That said, the UN system has acquired
various additional agencies and programmes since the 1960s, and the OECD
was established in 1962. Moreover, most transworld governance institutions
have in recent decades experienced unprecedented expansion in their compe¬
tences, memberships, staffs and budgets.

Transplanetary legal instruments have proliferated at the same time. The
half-century after 1950 saw the conclusion of 70 per cent more multilateral
treaties than in the preceding full century (Ku, 2001: 4). A number of these
laws have related to so-called ‘global commons’ (a concept popularized in the
1970s) like Antarctica, the deep seabed, and outer space.

As is elaborated in Chapter 6, these various transworld frameworks have
added wide-ranging and influential supraterritorial qualities to contempor¬
ary regulation. It is in this regard not surprising that the phrase ‘global
governance’ was coined in the late 1980s and rapidly acquired common
currency in the 1990s. Talk of the need for global public policy has not been
far behind.



Globalization in History 107


Production

As previously noted, transworld production processes and associated intra¬
firm trade did not exist in earlier phases of globalization. These activities first
gained substantial proportions in the 1960s, when supraterritorial coordina¬
tion developed especially in the production of semiconductors and consumer
electronics. Subsequently the trend spread to the assembly phase in the manu¬
facture of clothing, motor vehicles and appliances. More recently, many
service industries have turned to global production, for example, by siting
data processing operations in the Caribbean, India and Ireland.

As the preceding points indicate, global production has developed mainly,
though not exclusively, through the location of the labour-intensive phases of
a process at low-wage sites, particularly in the South. Indeed, many states
with large and on the whole relatively poorly skilled labour forces have
sought to lure global corporations to their jurisdictions with special tax and
regulatory measures. These advantages have generally applied to designated
areas known by names such as special economic zones (SEZs), export
processing zones (EPZs), and free production zones (FPZs). Within these
enclaves of so-called ‘offshore’ manufacture, global companies may enjoy
subsidies, tax exemptions, advantageous investment codes, the suspension of
restrictive social and environmental regulations, and other privileges (World
Bank, 1992; ILO, 1998).

Like the global production processes that flow through them, offshore
zones are new to contemporary history. Although the first of these arrange¬
ments appeared in the late 1950s (in Columbia and Ireland), host states have
created most of these special areas since the mid-1970s. By the late 1980s
there were around 260 EPZs in 67 countries, most prominently in Asia and
the Caribbean (Lang and Hines, 1993: 82). The number multiplied further in
the 1990s with, for example, several former communist-ruled countries join¬
ing the trend. Some 3,000 EPZs were in place in 116 countries across the
globe by 2002 (ILO, 2003:2).

Markets

Contemporary globalization has also seen far more transplanetary distribu¬
tion of finished products through global trade. The value of world cross-
border trade rose from $629 billion in 1960 to $7,430 billion in 2001
(Balaam andVeseth, 2001: 111; WTO-2, 2002: 13).

A number of new transport technologies have facilitated this growth. Many
vehicles have become larger and faster. Standard twenty- and forty-foot
container units, introduced in the late 1960s, are easily transferred between
trucks, trains, boats and aeroplanes, thereby permitting ready intermodal
movements of goods across the planet. In addition, air express services have



108 Framework of Analysis


given a supraterritorial quality to some deliveries. Companies such as DHL,
UPS and TNT have offered 24-hour transworld shipments since the late 1960s.

Aided by these and other technological developments, the principal spread
of global products has occurred since the second half of the twentieth century.
Today many supermarkets and department stores are mainly stocked with
transworld articles. To mention just a few of the thousands of global brand
names, Twinings teas are now sold in 120 blends across over 100 countries.
Kiwi shoe polishes are marketed in 130 countries. The global Interflora
network of 58,000 florists allows intimates to exchange bouquets in and
between 140 countries. Each month Reader’s Digest reaches nearly 100
million people across more than 60 countries through 48 editions and 19
languages. Promoting its religious product, the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints has provided the Book of Mormon with translations into
86 languages for its ten million members across 159 countries. Global trade
has also taken malevolent forms with transworld trafficking in body parts,
illicit drugs, and women and children.

Not only countless goods, but also some of their retail distributors have
gone global since the 1970s (Treadgold, 1993). Well-known examples of
such chains include Italy-based Benetton clothing shops, Japan-based
7-Eleven convenience stores, and Sweden-based IKEA furniture warehouses.
Alternatively, today’s global consumer can - equipped with a sales catalogue,
credit card, and telephone, television or Internet links - shop the earth with¬
out leaving the house. Mail-order outlets and telesales units have undergone
exponential growth, while e-commerce on the World Wide Web has
expanded several thousand times from less than $3 billion in 1996 to nearly
$6.8 trillion in 2004 (Bacchetta et al., 1998: 23; HDR, 1999: 60; Global
Reach, 2004b). A few commodity exchanges (for example, the New York
Mercantile Exchange and the Sydney Futures Exchange) have established
electronic links that enable instantaneous transworld trading between them.

Yet the contemporary accelerated globalization of markets has involved
more than exponential growth in the numbers of affected products and
outlets. Equally important has been the greater intensity of supraterritoriality
in today’s markets. Advances in transplanetary telephony, computer
networks and air transport have allowed managers considerably to increase
their supraterritorial coordination of distribution, promotion and sales activ¬
ities. Local circumstances have often continued strongly to influence market¬
ing decisions at the level of individual sales outlets, but in many companies
the primary strategic framework has become global.


Money

As noted earlier, money was thoroughly territorialized in the mid-twentieth
century. The Bretton Woods Agreements of 1944 provided for the creation of



Globalization in History 109


a dollar-centred gold standard, and this regime of fixed exchange rates
became fully operational in 1959. Under the Bretton Woods arrangements
the US dollar became a global currency, so much so that, by the early 1970s,
the value of dollars circulating outside the USA exceeded the value of gold
stocks held by the Federal Reserve Bank. In these circumstances the Nixon
Administration halted dollar-gold convertibility in 1971.

However, in contrast to the return to monetary territorialism that
followed earlier collapses of a gold standard in 1914 and the early 1930s, the
demise of the Bretton Woods regime did nothing to halt the globalization of
money. On the contrary, in the new situation of floating exchange rates the
German mark, the Japanese yen, the Swiss franc and a dozen other national
currencies joined the US dollar as global stores of value, units of account and
means of exchange. Today trillions of dollars’ worth of national denomina¬
tions are used in innumerable transactions that never touch the ‘home’ soil.
Meanwhile the aggregate value of official foreign exchange reserves in the
world rose from $100 billion in 1970 to $1,579 billion in 1997 (Spero, 1990:
41; BIS, 1998: 105).

At the same time other global monies have appeared in the shape of supra-
state currencies. The previously mentioned SDR was created in 1969 as a
reserve denomination under the supervision of the IMF. Two releases of
SDRs, one in 1970-2 and the other in 1979-81, added around $30 billion of
this currency to the world money supply. In 1997 the Board of Governors of
the IMF approved an as-yet still unratified doubling of SDR allocations. The
most important regional suprastate money, the euro, entered into electronic
circulation in 1999 and took tangible form in 2002. The euro had its fore¬
runners in the European Unit of Account, devised in 1961 as a denomination
for certain bonds, and the European Currency Unit (ECU), created in 1978
with wider uses. Both the ECU and the SDR have resided only in computer
memories for accounting purposes, whereas the euro has slipped into purses
for the transactions of everyday life.

Several other forms of supraterritorial money have also been new to the
period of accelerated globalization: international credit cards from 1951,
chip or ‘smart’ cards from 1981, and debit cards in the 1990s. In 2002 over
one billion Visa credit cards were accepted in over 150 countries for trans¬
actions amounting to $2.4 trillion. Visa, a name adopted by BankAmericard
in 1976, expounds a vision of universal or u-commerce done ‘anywhere,
anytime, any way’ (Visa, 2003). Meanwhile, rival MasterCard had come to
be recognized at more than 32 million establishments in 210 countries and
other territories (MasterCard, 2003). These and other bank passes allow the
holder to extract cash from ATMs, first introduced in 1969 and numbering
900,000 in over 120 countries by 2003 (MasterCard, 2003).

Through the developments just described, territorial currencies have lost
the near-monopoly position that they held in respect of money in the middle



110 Framework of Analysis


of the twentieth century. Moreover, monetary globalization since the 1970s
has far exceeded anything witnessed under the gold standards or before. For
one thing, the amounts of money involved are far greater. In addition, the
supraterritorial quality of this money has much increased, particularly with
the advent of electronic finance.


Finance

Unprecedented financial globalization has transpired in contemporary
history with respect to foreign exchange dealings, banking, securities
markets, derivatives business and the insurance industry. The average volume
of daily transactions on the world’s wholesale foreign exchange markets rose
a hundredfold in a quarter of a century between 1973 and 1998, from $15
billion to $1,500 billion. The introduction of the euro and other develop¬
ments prompted turnover to drop to the still massive figure of $1,210 billion
per day in 2001, which rose once more to an average daily figure of over
$1,900 billion at the end of 2004 (BIS 2001a, 2001c: 98-100; CLS, 2004;
Gilpin, 2001: 261). Now more is traded in six hours on the forex markets
than the World Bank has lent in its entire history (Clark, 2001: 17). The
Continuous Tinked Settlement (CLS) process introduced in 2003 ensures
same-day final settlement of transactions across currencies between the lead¬
ing global commercial banks. Meanwhile the retail sector has seen a world¬
wide proliferation of ‘bureaux de change’ where customers can walk off the
street to buy and sell a score of currencies on demand.

In banking, the second half of the twentieth century introduced the
phenomenon of global deposits. In these accounts, savers use transworld
bank networks to place their funds anywhere on the planet. The world total
of bank deposits owned by nonresidents rose from $20 billion in 1964 to $7.9
trillion in 1995 (IMF, 1993: 60-70; BIS, 1996: 7). Commercial banks in the
world’s main financial centres saw the share of their assets attributable to
nonresident depositors rise from around 5 per cent in 1960 to around 40 per
cent by 1990 (Porter, 1993: 54). In addition, several trillion US dollars’ worth
of bank deposits now lie in offshore finance centres, which have proliferated
from the handful created before 1950 to 60 jurisdictions at the turn of the
century (Doggart, 1993; Roberts, 1994; Palan, 1998, 2003; Flampton and
Abbott, 1999; TCO, 2001). Among the larger centres, the Cayman Islands
today host more than 500 offshore banks (alongside only six branches for
local business), while over 200 are registered in Luxembourg and over 70 in
Guernsey (Roberts, 1995).

With electronic transfers, the globalization of finance also allows monies
to be moved instantaneously between bank offices over whatever distance.
Key conduits for these transactions are the computerized systems of CFIIPS
(the Clearing House Interbank Payment System) and SWIFT (the Society for



Globalization in History 111


Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications). Begun in 1970,
CHIPS typically processed $148 billion per day of US dollar payments across
the globe in 1980, rising steeply to $1.37 trillion through 270,000 trans¬
actions per day in 2005 (CHIPS, 2005). Started in 1977, SWIFT operations in
2004 carried an average of 9.1 million messages per day (with an average
transit time of less than 20 seconds) between over 7,500 financial institutions
in 202 countries (SWIFT, 2005).

Contemporary globalization has also affected the lending side of banking
as never before. Credit was first created from global accounts in 1957, when
Moscow Narodny Bank issued a loan of $800,000 in London. In other
words, a bank based in one country made a loan in a second country using a
globally circulating currency that originated in a third country.
Supraterritorial lending by transplanetary syndicates of commercial banks
began on a significant scale in the early 1970s and has expanded massively
since. The value of new transworld syndicated bank credits totalled around a
trillion dollars per annum in the late 1990s (BIS, 2000b: 120,122). Aggregate
outstanding balances on these loans rose from less than $200 billion in the
early 1970s to well over $8,000 billion in 2001 (BIS, 1998: 144; BIS, 2001b:
10). Other global lending has taken place on a large scale since the 1960s
through official multilateral financial agencies like the IMF, the World Bank
Group, and regional development banks for Africa, the Americas, Asia, the
Caribbean and Europe. The capital base of the IMF has risen tenfold since the
1960s, to reach almost $300 billion in 1999.

Veritably supraterritorial securities markets started in the 1960s with the
advent of the eurobond market. The first eurobond issue came in July 1963,
when the state highways authority in Italy issued debt in London denomi¬
nated in US dollars through financial managers in Belgium, Britain, Germany
and the Netherlands. The annual volume of new eurobonds grew to $5 billion
in 1972, $43 billion in 1982, and $371 billion in 1995 (Kerr, 1984: 30-1,51;
OECD, 1996b). By the end of the 1980s only the secondary market for US
domestic bonds remained larger than that for global bonds (Honeygold,
1989: 19). Net issuance of all cross-border bonds and notes rose from $247
billion in 1994 to $1,157 billion in 1999 (BIS, 2000b: 112).

In the equity markets, the quotations of US-based corporations Gillette
and ITT on the London Stock Exchange were rare instances of extraterritor¬
ial share listings in 1950. Forty years later externally based companies
accounted for nearly half of the quotations on the Amsterdam and Frankfurt
bourses, a third of those on the Zurich and Paris markets, and over a fifth of
those on the London Stock Exchange (O’Brien, 1992: 45). A few global
companies like Nestle and Alcatel Alsthom have issued equities on as many as
a dozen bourses across the world. The 1990s also saw the appearance of
American Depository Receipts (ADRs) and Global Depository Receipts
(GDRs). In these instruments, shares of companies based in Asia, Eastern



112 Framework of Analysis


Europe and Latin America are bundled into packages and traded at global
financial centres.

Globality has arisen not only in relation to individual security instruments,
but also in the ways that they are assembled in investment portfolios.
Numerous investors (especially institutions such as pension funds, insurance
companies, unit trusts and hedge funds) today operate transplanetary port¬
folios. Many of these investment companies have further deepened their
supraterritorial character by registering offshore, particularly in
Luxembourg, the Bahamas, Dublin and the Channel Islands.

Meanwhile electronic communications have enabled investors and dealers
instantly to transmit and execute orders to buy and sell securities - in princi¬
ple anywhere across the planet. Moreover, since 1985 a number of stock
exchanges have established transworld electronic links between themselves.
Before 1980 transactions in bonds and equities between resident and non¬
resident investors were negligible. The value of cross-border dealings in
shares increased (in constant 1994 dollars) from $1.4 billion in 1987 to $2.6
billion in 1994 (Scott and Wellons, 2000: 17). By 1997 the value of cross-
border securities transactions was equivalent to 672 per cent of GDP in Italy,
253 per cent of GDP in Germany, and 213 per cent of GDP in the USA (BIS,
1998: 100). In 1980 the figure for the USA had been only 9 per cent of GDP
(. Economist , 18 October 1997).

Most payments connected with global securities trading are effected
through one of two computerized transplanetary clearinghouses. Euroclear
was established in Brussels in 1968, while Cedel has operated since 1971
from Luxembourg. These giant electronic bookkeeping operations fulfil a
role in global securities trading akin to that of CLS in foreign exchange deal¬
ing and CHIPS and SWILT in supraterritorial banking. Euroclear alone
processed 118 trillion euros’ worth of bonds, stocks and investment funds in
2003 (Euroclear, 2005).

Globalization has also burgeoned since the 1970s in regard to financial
derivatives. This market started on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in 1972
and has subsequently spread to several score of trading sites around the
world. Global markets in futures, options and other types of derivatives
contracts have developed in respect of foreign exchange rates, interest levels,
bond and share prices, stock market indices and more. The total world
annual turnover on organized derivatives exchanges alone (thus not counting
the larger number of over-the-counter deals) stood at more than $350 trillion
in 1997 (BIS, 1998: 155-6). The notional amount of outstanding over-the-
counter financial derivatives contracts reached $88 trillion at the end of 1999
and $197 trillion at the close of 2003 (BIS, 2000a: 26; BIS, 2004: 1). Like
most major contemporary securities markets, the financial derivatives busi¬
ness is mainly electronic, using telephone lines and information display termi¬
nals that connect traders anywhere in the world. Moreover, several



Globalization in History 113


derivatives exchanges in different time zones (for example, London and
Singapore, Chicago and Sydney) have established direct links to enable
round-the-world, round-the-clock dealing in certain futures and options.

Still further transplanetary connectivity has spread in the insurance sector.
All of the major insurance companies now operate across the major global
financial centres. Meanwhile the six largest insurance brokers have devel¬
oped a World Insurance Network (WIN) that allows them to transact busi¬
ness across the earth from their office computers.

In sum, then, finance has shifted very substantially out of the territorialist
framework that defined most banking, securities, derivatives and insurance
business before the middle of the twentieth century. The amounts transacted
are staggering: multiple trillions of US dollars’ worth per day. Such figures
dwarf the numbers associated with sales turnover in other global markets and
investment in transworld production processes. It is understandable that
many worries concerning ‘globalization out of control’ have centred on the
financial sector.


Social ecology

Many other worries about the course of contemporary globalization have
focused on its environmental aspects. Anthropogenic global ecological
changes did not occur on any notable scale before the middle of the twentieth
century. Prior to the early 1970s, no question of transplanetary environmen¬
tal degradation held any sustained prominence on the political agenda. Since
then, however, governments have signed over a hundred multilateral treaties
on environmental issues. Scientists have undertaken several dozen major
initiatives to study transworld ecological developments. Millions of citizens
across the globe have joined environmental NGOs like the World Wide Fund
for Nature (WWF) and Greenpeace.

Three global ecological problems have gained greatest attention. One, the
depletion of stratospheric ozone, accelerated from the 1960s and began to
raise alarms in the 1980s. As of the mid-1990s, this shield to protect the
earth’s surface from biologically active ultraviolet radiation from outer space
was thinning at a rate of 3 per cent per decade (GACGC, 1995: 1). The main
assault on stratospheric ozone has come from chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),
invented in 1931 and widely used in industrial and consumer products from
the 1950s.

A second widely discussed supraterritorial environmental issue - popu¬
larly known as ‘global warming’ - involves anthropogenic increases in green¬
house gases and their consequences for the planetary climate. This human
interference with the chemical composition of the atmosphere has come
through the industrial production of carbon, methane, halocarbons and
nitrous oxide. This activity dates back to the beginnings of industrialization



114 Framework of Analysis


in the middle of the eighteenth century, but the main, accelerated rises in
levels of greenhouse gases have occurred since the second half of the twenti¬
eth century. For example, carbon emissions from fossil fuel combustion grew
from about 1.5 billion tons per annum in 1950 to an average of around 5.5
billion tons per annum in the 1980s (GACGC, 1995: 12; Porter and Brown,
1996: 6). Carbon dioxide levels have increased from 200-275 parts per
million by volume (ppmv) in the preindustrial era to 370 ppmv at the start of
twenty-first century ( Guardian , 24 July 2001: 5). The Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, formed in 1988, has concluded that the anthro¬
pogenic greenhouse effect has brought a rise in the mean surface temperature
of the earth of between about 0.3°C and 0.6°C since the late nineteenth
century (IPCC, 1995: 22). This global warming may have any number of
consequences, including a rise in the average sea level, intensified soil erosion,
altered patterns of disease, and increased species extinction.

Loss of biological diversity is already large enough to constitute a third
main instance of contemporary global ecological change. For example, it is
estimated that three-quarters of crop varieties were lost in the course of the
twentieth century (Porter and Brown, 1996:12). Meanwhile whole packages
of genes disappear when a species becomes extinct. Owing mainly to the
exponential growth of human consumption of environmental assets over the
past 150 years, the pace of species extinction has increased between 1,000
and 10,000 times (Wilson, 1988: 13). Different authorities have calculated
that an average of anywhere between 20 and 200 species died out each day in
the late twentieth century (Myers, 1993:179; GACGC, 1995: 32). A middle-
range estimate suggests that the rate of loss rose from around one species per
annum at the turn of the century to six species per year in 1950, before
skyrocketing to some 10,000 species annually in 1990 (Myers, 1985:155). In
spite of this exponential increase in extinctions, biodiversity is arguably still
underappreciated as a global resource.

Other global ecological problems mentioned briefly in Chapter 2 have also
mainly emerged since the middle of the twentieth century. In respect of acid
rain, for instance, annual world emissions of sulphur dioxide rose from some
70 million metric tonnes in 1950 to around 180 million metric tonnes in 1990
(Porter and Brown, 1996: 8). Transplanetary fallout from nuclear devices
dates from the first detonations of atomic weapons in 1945 and spread to
civilian facilities in 1986 with the explosion of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor.
The depletion of tropical moist forests (or ‘rainforests’) has also mainly tran¬
spired since the second half of the twentieth century, thereby reducing one of
the Earth’s principal sites of photosynthesis and major concentrations of
biomass (crucial for the creation of new species). The worldwide construction
of large dams in recent history has shifted ten trillion metric tonnes of water
from the oceans to the continents and moved the earth’s axis of rotation sixty
centimetres from the North Pole towards western Canada (Myers, 1996: 1).



Globalization in History 115


Annual world consumption of fresh water quadrupled between the 1950s
and the 1990s, while world per capita availability of fresh water declined by
more than a third, raising fears of a developing global water shortage (Porter
and Brown, 1996: 11). At the same time between a quarter and a third of the
earth’s land surface, home to 600-900 million people, is threatened to some
degree with desertification (McCormick, 1989:117; GACGC, 1995: 33).

The jury is still out on many questions concerning the precise character,
causes, magnitude, rate and locational distribution of anthropogenic global
environmental transformations, as well as the severity of their consequences
for human and other life on earth. However, the substantial supraterritorial
quality of these phenomena and their generally increased scale since the mid¬
twentieth century is indisputable.


Military

Also eminently apparent is the major expansion of military globalization
since the 1950s. Although no ‘Third World War’ has as yet been waged, the
so-called Cold War between the USA and the USSR extended to all corners of
the planet. In the name of saving humanity from communism, American
armed forces intervened everywhere from Turkey to Korea to Vietnam to
Grenada, not to mention a host of clandestine operations and proxy wars.
For their part Soviet troops and military advisers surfaced in Cuba,
Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Angola as well as in major concentrations across
Eastern Europe and along the USSR’s border with China.

Other global military campaigns have continued after the end of the Cold
War. For example, state armies from far-flung parts of the planet have
converged on Somalia, Bosnia, Kosovo and Iraq. In addition, UN peacekeep¬
ing operations, first started in 1956, have multiplied to unprecedented
numbers since the 1990s. As discussed further in Chapter 9, global paramili¬
tary and terrorist violence has grown to become a major source of human
insecurity in contemporary history.

The decades since the 1950s have also seen the main development of global
weapons. Intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) with nuclear warheads
were introduced by the USA in 1957 and the USSR three years later.
Originally launched from land, ballistic and cruise missiles can now also be
fired from submarines, trucks and aircraft. Originally carrying conventional
bombs and nuclear devices, the missiles can now also transport chemical
weapons and biological agents. Meanwhile advances in guidance systems
have greatly enhanced the precision with which the long-range missiles can
hit targets (Mackenzie, 1990). The US military has proposed satellite-based
defences against missiles since the 1980s, but so far has refrained from full-
scale development of what has popularly been termed a ‘star wars’ system
(Fitzgerald, 2000; Wirtz and Larsen, 2001).



116 Framework of Analysis


Consciousness

No numerical measures of global consciousness are available; however, it seems
safe to venture that people today are generally more aware than ever before of
the planet as a single place and are more inclined to conceive of the earth as a
whole as humanity’s home. ‘World records’ were not registered until the twenti¬
eth century, with the first edition of the best-selling Guinness Book appearing in
1955. The popular ‘global village’ metaphor was coined in the 1960s (McLuhan
and Fiore, 1968), while the Gaia hypothesis that the planet exists as a single
living being was formulated in the 1970s (Lovelock, 1972,1979). Earth Day was
first marked in 1970. A hundred years ago global consciousness was generally
limited to fleeting perceptions in limited elite circles. Today, with globes in the
classroom, world weather reports in the news, and global products in the
cupboard, transworld dimensions of social life are part of everyday awareness
for hundreds of millions of persons across the planet. Global consciousness
perhaps gained its single greatest boost by the transworld diffusion in 1966 of
pictures taken from outer space showing the earth as one location. Now the
symbol of the globe surfaces in every corner of daily life.

At the start of the twenty-first century globality is widely and deeply
embedded in academic, commercial, official and popular thinking. Seasoned
travellers boast a global collection of souvenirs. Meanwhile television daily
takes even the most sedentary viewer across the planet in an instant. Every
week brings a global news sensation, a global sports competition, and a
global conference of some prominence. Recent decades have brought a
growth of so-called ‘world music’ and ‘world literature’ that blend and tran¬
scend territorial cultures. In recognition of the growing importance of trans¬
planetary spaces, some (albeit far from enough) statistics are now calculated
on a global basis. For example, providers of financial data have devised
several transplanetary share price indices, including the FT/S&amp;P Actuaries
World Index, started in 1987, and the International Flerald Tribune World
Stock Index, started in 1992.

Accelerated globalization since the mid-twentieth century has also
brought some growth in transworld solidarities. On the one hand, human
disasters connected with disease, hunger, natural catastrophes and war have
elicited global sympathies and assistance with a frequency and a scale not
known in earlier times. Newer transworld social movements concerned with
consumer protection, environmental concerns and human rights have joined
older global labour and peace movements. In addition, as is discussed further
in Chapter 7, a host of transplanetary bonds have deepened in contemporary
history with respect to class, disability, gender, generation (especially youth
culture), profession, religion, race and sexual orientation. People living under
conditions of globalization have increasingly constructed significant aspects
of their identity in supraterritorial terms.



Globalization in History 117


Summary indicators of accelerated globalization

in contemporary history

telephone lines (fixed and

from 150 million in 1965 to over 1,500

mobile)

million in 2000

mobile telephones

from 0 in 1978 to over 1 billion in 2004

Internet users

from 0 in 1985 to 934 million in 2004

radio sets

from 57 million in the mid-1930s to 2,400
million in 1997

television receivers

from 75 million in 1956 to 1,400 million
in 1997

international air travellers

from 25 million in 1950 to 400 million in
1996

receipts from international

from $ 19 billion in 1970 to $ 3 8 9 billion in

travel

1996

export processing zones

from 0 in 1957 to 3,000 in 2002

foreign exchange reserves

from $100 billion in 1970 to $1,579
billion in 1997

daily foreign exchange

from $15 billion in 1973 to $1,900 billion

turnover

in 2004

bank deposits by nonresidents

from $20 billion in 1964 to $7,900 billion
in 1995

international bank loans

from $9 billion in 1972 to $1,465 billion
in 2000

balances on international

from $200 billion early 1970s to $10,383

bank loans

billion in 1997

issuance of global bonds

from 0 in 1962 to $371 billion in 1995

over-the-counter financial
derivatives contracts

from 0 in 1971 to $197 trillion in 2003

world stock of FDI

from $66 billion in 1960 to $7,100 billion
in 2002

international trade

from $629 billion in 1960 to $7,430
billion in 2001

international companies

from 7,000 in late 1960s to 65,000 in

2001

international CSOs

from 1,117 in 1956 to over 20,000 in

2000

annual species extinction

from 6 in 1950 to 10,000 in 1990


Conclusion

Hence, when conceived as the rise of transplanetary and supraterritorial
social connections, globalization is mainly new to contemporary history.



118 Framework of Analysis


Only since the middle of the twentieth century has globality figured continu¬
ally, comprehensively and centrally in the lives of a large proportion of
humanity. Hundreds of millions of people now experience direct and often
instantaneous written, auditory and/or visual contact with previously distant
others several times per day.

Again, contemporary globalization is not a rerun of earlier times, includ¬
ing in particular the late nineteenth century. Arguments of repetition
between the two periods have mainly rested on comparisons of just three
indicators: namely, levels of cross-border merchandise trade, foreign direct
investment, and permanent migration. A number of economists have noted
that, on certain proportionate calculations, international trade and invest¬
ment reached similar extents in the 1890-1913 period as in the 1990s
(Baker et al., 1998: 5, 9, 339; Balaam and Veseth, 2001: 168). Moreover,
numbers of permanent migrants were similar in the two periods in absolute
terms.

Yet to conclude a broader rerun of history on the basis of this evidence
alone is unsustainable (cf. Baldwin and Martin, 1999; Sutcliffe and Glyn,
2003). For one thing, these accounts overlook many other instances of glob¬
ality whose current levels are incomparably higher than anything experienced
in the nineteenth century. Take for instance the scale of contemporary
telecommunications, air travel, transworld goods, transplanetary financial
transactions, transworld civil society associations, global regulations, global
festivals, and global awareness among general publics the world over. In
addition, the repetition thesis ignores various key aspects of contemporary
globalization that were wholly absent in the late nineteenth century, such as
digital computers, advanced telecommunications, television, electronic
money and finance, transworld production chains, and measurable anthro¬
pogenic global ecological changes.

Even the three key indicators that underpin the repetition thesis are prob¬
lematic. The trade and investment statistics refer to proportionate amounts,
whereas absolute numbers are far higher for the present day than in the nine¬
teenth century. The trade figures only cover merchandise exports, while the
scope of contemporary global commerce involves many more goods and
services. The similarity in absolute numbers of migrants becomes less striking
when one considers short-term transworld travel and tourism as well as
permanent relocations. In other words, total global movements of people
(temporary as well as permanent) are far greater today than a hundred years
ago. Finally, nineteenth-century trade and investment lacked the far greater
supraterritorial characteristics that are manifested today; thus even if quanti¬
ties might on certain calculations be similar, the spatial qualities of many
contemporary global transactions are significantly different. For instance,
intra-firm trade barely existed a century ago, but accounts for up to a quarter
of cross-border commerce today.



Globalization in History 119


In sum, then, although globalization has a longer history, the antecedents
to recent trends must not be exaggerated. A sense of range, scale and impact
is lost when people argue that there is nothing new in contemporary global
connectivity. It makes ample sense that the vocabulary of ‘globality’ and
‘globalization’ was absent in the nineteenth century and has only surfaced in
recent times.

To be sure, as emphasized before, it is important not to exaggerate the
extent of globalization even today. After all, world telephone density in 1995
was still limited to 12 sets per 100 head of population. At present only about
15 per cent of humanity accesses the Internet. Transborder corporations
directly employ only a small proportion of the world workforce, namely, 73
million persons as of 1992 (ILO, 1995: 45). A large majority of people alive
today have never joined - let alone been actively involved in - a transworld
civil society association.

Nor, to repeat a qualification from Chapter 2, has globalization involved
all people on earth to the same extent. For one thing, the large majority of
global transactions has occurred between people in the North. In addition,
the rise of supraterritoriality has touched urban centres (especially so-called
‘global cities’) more than rural areas. The trend has involved propertied and
professional classes more than poorer and less literate circles. Women and
people of colour have generally had less access to global spaces than men and
white people. On various counts, then, contemporary globalization has often
gone hand in hand with marginalization. This unevenness between countries
and social groupings is elaborated in Chapter 10 with reference to the
inequalities of contemporary globalization.

That said, accelerated globalization of recent decades has left almost no
one and no locale on earth completely untouched, and the pace has on the
whole progressively quickened with time. This does not mean that the process
is linear and irreversible. For example, as noted earlier, money has over the
past two centuries had alternating phases of territorialization and globaliza¬
tion. Perhaps ecological constraints like exhaustion of natural resources and
climate change could put a brake on globalization in the long or maybe even
medium term.

However, at present the forces behind globalization (identified in the next
chapter) would seem to rule out any major reversal in the short or medium
run. Several authors (cited in the preface to this second edition) who have
recently suggested that globalization is finished can marshal little convincing
evidence to support such a claim. Current trends in technological innovation
and regulation heavily favour a further expansion of transplanetary connec¬
tivity. For example, prospective advances in fibre-optic cables will yield
capacities running into the millions of telephone calls per hair-thin strand.
Likewise, both capitalism as a mode of production that promotes globaliza¬
tion and rationalism as a mode of knowledge that stimulates globalization are



120 Framework of Analysis


today deeply entrenched. For the moment, to take a phrase from the Wall
Street Journal, globalization ‘is one buzzword that’s here to stay’ (26
September 1996: R2).

Maybe the expansion of transplanetary and supraterritorial links will not
continue across the twenty-first century at the often breakneck speeds that
have been witnessed during the past 50 years, but most current signs point to
further rather than less globalization in future. The coming years could bring
the end of certain policies towards globalization (like neoliberalism); hence
when Elmar Rieger and Stephan Leibfried have written of the ‘limits to glob¬
alization’ they have meant the limits to neoliberalist globalization (Rieger and
Leibfried, 2003). However, the growth of transworld spaces as such seems set
to continue. The key question for the future is therefore less ‘whether’ and
more ‘whither’ globalization. The trend is in this sense very much ‘an unfin¬
ished revolution’ (Shaw, 2000).



Chapter 4

Explaining Globalization

Main points of this chapter
Contending theories
An eclectic synthesis
Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• explanations of globalization can be approached through a number of
theoretical frameworks, including liberalism, political realism, Marxism,
constructivism, postmodernism, and feminism

• each of these perspectives offers insights into the dynamics that have
propelled globalization, but each is also overly narrow, missing important
aspects of the process

• an eclectic approach that interlinks developments in geography (like
globalization) with trends in production, governance, identity and
knowledge offers a more encompassing explanation


Having developed a definition of globalization and tracked a history of the
trend, this book’s analysis can proceed to the no less thorny issue of explana¬
tion. Why and by what dynamics has the spread of transplanetary (including
supraterritorial) connectivity occurred? What has made globalization
happen? This question is crucial not only to satisfy intellectual curiosity, but
also to inform policy action. In order to anticipate possible future courses of
globalization and to shape those processes in desired directions, it is necessary
to understand the forces that have generated the development and brought it
to its present position. Viable explanation provides grounds for sound predic¬
tion, prescription and action.

Given this crucial importance of explanation, it is surprising - and disap¬
pointing - to find that existing research on globalization has given this
matter comparatively little attention. In fact, the present book is one of rela¬
tively few in the burgeoning literature on globalization that devotes a chap¬
ter specifically to explaining the trend. Most other works have tended to
make only passing and fairly unspecific reference to conditions such as capi¬
talism, modernity, technological change, or US hegemony as forces behind


121




122 Framework of Analysis


globalization. Many accounts have not explicitly addressed issues of causa¬
tion at all. Of course no explanation of globalization can be completely
adequate, but that unavoidable shortfall does not justify skirting the ques¬
tion.

Much as there are multiple possible definitions and periodizations of glob¬
alization, so too there are multiple explanations on offer. Some accounts
have, methodologically, a more materialist character, locating the forces that
produce globalization in economics and ecology. Other explanations take a
methodologically more idealist approach, putting the emphasis on cultural
and psychological causes. In addition, the various theoretical frameworks
advance different accounts of the key actors, structures and historical dyna¬
mics that have generated globalization. The diverse perspectives also highlight
different core issues and (implicitly if not explicitly) promote different inter¬
ests. Accordingly, each type of explanatory framework tends to point
towards different sorts of policy prescriptions.

The first part of this chapter reviews a broad menu of available theories for
explaining globalization. In turn a succession of subsections examine liberal¬
ism, political realism, Marxism, constructivism, postmodernism, and femi¬
nism. Each of these six perspectives is found to provide distinctive insights
towards an explanation of globalization, but all are also limited by excessive
parsimony. That is, in each case the analytical need to simplify is taken to the
point of oversimplification, where the explanation offered is unsustainably
narrow. Too much is left out.

The second part of the chapter synthesizes key insights from the various
theoretical frameworks in a multifaceted social explanation of globalization.
This eclectic approach attributes the growth of transplanetary connectivity to
interrelated impulses from the realms of production (namely, certain turns in
capitalist development), governance (namely, various enabling regulatory
conditions), identity (namely, particular ways of asserting being and belong¬
ing), and knowledge (namely, certain logics of rationalist consciousness). By
this argument it is not one variable that has generated globalization, but a
complex interplay of several forces (cf. Held etal., 1999; Waters, 2001; Urry,
2003).

Nor is causation held to flow in one direction with respect to globalization.
The trend is treated here as both explanandum (something to be explained)
and explanans (something that explains - or at least contributes to an explan¬
ation of other trends). The present chapter considers the ‘explanandum’
side: namely, how circumstances in the areas of production, governance,
identity and knowledge have combined to produce globalization.
Conversely, subsequent chapters in Part II of the book examine the
‘explanans’ side: namely, how the geographical shift to greater globality has
influenced developments in the four other spheres.



Explaining Globalization 123


Contending theories

In principle globalization can be explained in a host of different ways. Any of
the main schools of social and political theory can offer a story of why trans¬
planetary connections have developed, and why global relations have prolif¬
erated with particular speed and intensity in recent history. The various
approaches are surveyed below to give a sense of the possible range of explan¬
ations, before the second half of the chapter elaborates a more specific
account that is adopted for this book’s analysis.

The review that follows distinguishes six main types of social explanation
for globalization: liberalism, political realism, Marxism, constructivism,
postmodernism, and feminism. Each of these approaches is seen to take a
different perspective on:

• the central issue for investigation in respect of globalization;

• the material and/or ideational generators of global social relations;

• the key actor(s) that have propelled globalization;

• the principal structure(s) that have produced globalization; and

• the core dynamic! s) of history that have driven globalization.

What follows is a very general survey. The accounts of the various schools
of thought are highly compressed and simplified. Only the basic premises of
each approach are identified and assessed. Other writings have elaborated
much more sophisticated versions of the various positions. The more limited
purpose in the present context is to offer a summary overview of the range of
possible explanations of globalization, as a prelude to setting out the explana¬
tory framework that informs this volume. More detailed treatments of
contending perspectives can be found in theory textbooks (e.g., Baylis and
Smith, 2005: pt 2; Burchill et al., 2005).

Nor is the sixfold typology of theories laid out below complete. This
review covers the main social explanations of globalization. A more compre¬
hensive survey could in addition consider environmentalist theories that
focus on the ecological dynamics of globalization (Lovelock, 1979) and spir¬
itual approaches that explore globalization in relation to the metaphysical
(Rifkin, 2003). More restrictedly, this chapter limits its range to accounts that
explain globalization in terms of social action and social structure.

The sixfold categorization of explanations presented here is also overly
neat. Many scholars and writings do not fit precisely and consistently into
one or the other school of thought. Instead, lots of researchers take inspira¬
tion from more than one approach and/or shift their positions over time.
Moreover, many thinkers adopt less explicit and/or more nuanced stances on
core premises than the stark positions that are presented here. The tenets of
contending perspectives are expressed below as blunt ideal-types in order to



124 Framework of Analysis


emphasize contrasts between different possible points of view. In practice
accounts of globalization often do not fall obviously and wholly under one of
the six headings.

Likewise, there is plurality within each type of explanation distinguished
in the following paragraphs. For example, while all political realists focus on
the struggle for power among states, some examine this contention in terms
of hegemony, while others frame interstate competition in terms of the
balance of power. Similarly, there are numerous variations on the Marxist
theme of class relations within the capitalist mode of production. In recogni¬
tion of this diversity, headings below describe each approach in the plural
(i.e., liberalisms, postmodernisms, feminisms, etc.).


Liberalisms

Liberalist explanations of globalization tend to see the process as a market-
led extension of modernization. This type of approach is generally taken by
people who are interested in maximizing human progress through the pursuit
of currently dominant models of ‘development’, with an emphasis on
economic growth and liberal democracy. Most mainstream accounts of glob¬
alization - including those that promote neoliberalist policies of the kind
described in Chapter 1 - adopt some variant of liberalist explanation. Most
other perspectives on globalization develop their alternative explanations
largely out of critiques of liberalism.

From a liberalist position globalization is, at the most elementary level, a
result of ‘natural’ human desires for economic welfare and political liberty.
As such, increased transplanetary connectivity is ultimately derived from
human drives to maximize material well-being (through markets) and to
exercise basic freedoms (as guaranteed by publicly accountable government).
For liberalists globalization is an outcome of people’s strivings to escape
poverty as well as to achieve civil and political rights. On a liberalist account
it is inherent in market dynamics and modern democratization that these
forces should eventually interlink humanity across the planet.

On top of these assumed primordial human motivations for wealth and
freedom, liberalist explanations generally highlight two sorts of conditions as
being necessary for the realization of globalization. First, technological
advances - particularly in the areas of transport, communications and inform¬
ation processing - are required to effect transplanetary connections physi¬
cally. Second, suitable legal and institutional arrangements must be in place
to enable markets and liberal democracy to spread on a transworld scale.

As technological innovation is mainly the work of engineers, liberalist
social researchers generally focus their studies on institutional circumstances
that further or hinder globalization (cf. Keohane and Martin, 1995; Keohane,
1998; Ruggie, 1998). Hence liberalists investigate issues such as: the effects of



Explaining Globalization 125


different state policies in promoting or hampering globalization; whether
regional institutions act as stepping stones or stumbling blocks to globaliza¬
tion; the construction of global governance arrangements to support global
markets and global human rights; the role of market self-regulation in
advancing globalization; and the organization of firms and civil society asso¬
ciations for effective global action.

Given these emphases, most liberalist explanations of globalization have
emanated from the fields of Business Studies, Economics, International
Political Economy, Law, and Politics. Indeed, most work on globalization in
these disciplines has taken a broadly liberalist approach. In addition, some
economic geographers and economic sociologists have developed market and
institutionalist analyses of the development of global production and global
governance (e.g., Dicken, 2003). Work of the so-called Stanford School of
world society theory on global modernity has also fallen in a broadly liberal¬
ist frame (Boli, 2006).

Liberalist accounts of globalization have not generally been advertised
with this label. Whereas many political realists, Marxists, constructivists,
postmodernists and feminists have declared their affiliation with those
respective theories, most adherents of liberalism have taken this approach
without calling it such. In most cases readers have to infer this perspective
from the types of arguments that the author in question advances.

Liberalism has ranked as the principal orthodox account of globalization,
with particular support from circles of power. Liberalist explanations have
underpinned the neoliberalist prescriptions that are favoured in mainstream
policy circles. To the extent that liberalist attributions of globalization to
market forces, technology and institutions have had widespread acceptance
as ‘commonsense’, scholars taking this line of argument have faced less pres¬
sure to specify, verify and justify their approach compared to researchers who
adopt more critical perspectives.

To their credit, liberalist explanations have helpfully highlighted the
importance of technological change and institutional arrangements in
promoting globalization. Transplanetary connectivity could not have accel¬
erated and intensified as it has over the past half-century in the absence of air
travel, advanced telecommunications, digitization, and so on. Liberalists
have also astutely stressed the necessity of constructing institutional infra¬
structure to support globalization. Transworld relations have not appeared
spontaneously, but have required conducive regulatory circumstances of
inter alia technical standardization, administrative harmonization, transla¬
tion arrangements between languages, laws of contract, and guarantees of
property rights.

That said, liberalist explanations also have several major limitations. Lor
one thing, these accounts do not probe further to ask what social forces lie
behind the creation of technological and institutional underpinnings for



126 Framework of Analysis


globalization. It is not satisfactory to attribute these developments to
‘natural’ human drives for economic growth and political liberty. After all,
such strivings have been manifestly absent from many sociohistorical
contexts. If, as seems empirically to be the case, these impulses in their current
pronounced form are peculiarly modern, then researchers need to delve more
deeply into the structures of contemporary society for the conditions that
have prompted the technological and institutional bases of globalization.
Other theories considered below seek in different ways to do this.

A second significant shortcoming in liberalist explanations is their culture-
blindness. These accounts locate the causes of globalization in material
conditions of technology and institutions, without exploring the socially and
historically situated life-worlds and knowledge structures that have
promoted these technological and institutional developments. Instead, liber¬
alist accounts tend to suppose that culture (and cultural diversity) do not
matter in determining when, where and how globalization occurs. People
everywhere are assumed to be equally amenable to and desirous of increased
globality in their lives, when this is plainly not the case.

A third critical failing in liberalist explanations of globalization is their
inadequate attention to power. These arguments do stress that firms compete
for markets and that interest groups compete for benefits. However, liberal-
ists ignore the importance of structural power inequalities in prompting glob¬
alization and shaping its course. Liberalist explanations therefore have little
or no regard for entrenched power hierarchies between states, classes,
cultures, sexes, races, etc. Yet even the most cursory glance indicates that
globalization has been steeped in such structural inequalities and associated
political struggles.


Political realisms

Where liberalist accounts underplay questions of power, political realists put
struggles for power at the heart of their explanations of globalization (e.g.,
Gilpin, 2001). Political realism is the traditional power politics understand¬
ing of international relations. This approach is generally adopted by
researchers who are interested in questions of state power, the pursuit of
national interests, and conflict (including warfare) between states.

Political realists assume that territorial sovereign states are the principal
actors in world politics. Proponents of this approach further presume that
states are inherently acquisitive and self-serving, making for inevitable
competition as their insatiable appetites for power clash. To manage this
unavoidable interstate conflict, some political realists have advocated the use
of a balance of power, where any attempt by one state to achieve world domi¬
nance is countered by collective resistance from other states. Other political
realists have suggested that a dominant state can bring stability to world



Explaining Globalization 127


order if this so-called ‘hegemon’ maintains international rules and institu¬
tions that both advance its own interests and at the same time contain
conflicts between other states.

In the vein of hegemonic stability theory, globalization can be explained as
a way that the dominant state of the day - in the case of recent history the USA
- has asserted its primacy and concurrently created an environment of
controlled competition among states. On this account large-scale contemp¬
orary growth of transplanetary connectivity has allowed the US state to
promote its national interests and further its power. By implication, global¬
ization would recede if and when it was no longer in the interest of the US
state to sponsor the process, or if and when the US state lost the resource
dominance that underwrites its hegemonic status. No published account has
systematically explained globalization on quite these lines, but the general
logic of hegemonic stability theory has featured in some analyses of post-
1945 US foreign policy (Kennedy, 1987; Nye, 1990).

In another variant of political realism, globalization could be explained as
a strategy in the contest for power between several major states in contemp¬
orary world politics. On this line of argument, transplanetary connectivity
has advanced as the governments of Britain, China, France, Japan, the USA
and other large states have exploited the potentials of global relations to
bolster their respective power positions. Such states have aimed to attract
global firms into their jurisdiction to strengthen the domestic economy and
have supported global expansion by firms based in their jurisdiction to gain
influence over other states. Likewise, political realists would say, strong
states have in the pursuit of power developed global military capabilities,
promoted their currencies as global monies, and drawn in global migrants to
raise their country’s human capital.

Political-realist explanations of globalization have the merit of highlight¬
ing issues of power and power struggles, something that liberalist accounts
tend to ignore. Power politics perspectives also helpfully draw particular
attention to the role of states in generating global relations. As such, political
realism usefully counters unsustainable suppositions in some quarters that
globalization is antithetical to and undermines territorial states. Political real¬
ism also rightly stresses that states have not been equal in globalization, with
some being dominant and others subordinate in the process.

On the other hand, political realism arguably takes the emphasis on power
too far. The theory’s politics-centrism suggests that everything in globaliza¬
tion comes down to the acquisition, distribution and exercise of power. Not
surprisingly, proponents of this approach are found almost exclusively in the
fields of International Relations and Politics. Yet globalization also has
cultural, ecological, economic and psychological logics that are not reducible
to politics. Globalization is also about the production and consumption of
resources, about the discovery and affirmation of identity, about the



128 Framework of Analysis


construction and communication of meaning, and about humanity shaping
and being shaped by nature. To be sure, culture, ecology, economics and
psychology are bound up with power relations: these other aspects of social
relations are anything but apolitical. However, they are also more than polit¬
ical and require consideration in their own right, too.

The state-centrism of political realism is also a weakness, inasmuch as this
approach tends to neglect the importance of other actors in generating glob¬
alization. Within governance circles, for example, it is not only national
governments that have provided the regulatory frameworks for transplan¬
etary connections, but also substate authorities, macro-regional institutions,
global agencies, and private-sector bodies. Nor is it viable to explain the glob¬
alizing activities of nongovernmental actors like firms, civil society associa¬
tions, and households wholly in terms of the pursuit of national interest and
the assertion of state power. When going global these other types of actors
have followed motivations and exerted influences that are partly - and some¬
times quite substantially - autonomous from the policies of country govern¬
ments.

Similarly, political realism oversimplistically reduces power relations in
the creation of transplanetary spaces to a question of state hierarchies. The
primacy of the USA and other major governments has certainly helped to
stimulate contemporary globalization, to orient the process in particular
directions, and to skew the benefits of increased transworld connectivity in
favour of dominant states. However, additional types of power relations - for
example, on lines of class, culture and gender - have also affected the course
of globalization. These other structural inequalities cannot be adequately
explained as an outcome of interstate competition. Power politics among
states has no doubt had implications for hierarchies in globalization between
managers and workers, between various world religions, and between men
and women. Yet there is more to these other social dynamics than conflict
between major states. After all, class inequality, cultural hierarchy, and patri¬
archy predate the modern states system.

Marxisms

Marxist theories offer explanations of globalization that bring one of these
other power structures to the fore, namely, class relations. Marxism is the
principal political economy critique of liberalist orthodoxy. This approach is
adopted by researchers who are principally concerned with modes of produc¬
tion, social exploitation through unjust distribution, and social emancipation
through the transcendence of capitalism. Marxist arguments about global¬
ization have emanated from all fields of social enquiry, albeit most especially
from Geography, Politics and Sociology (Bromley, 1999; Rupert and Smith,
2002; Rosenberg, 2005).



Explaining Globalization 129


Marxists explain the expansion of transplanetary relations as an outcome
of the capitalist mode of production. Karl Marx himself presciently antici¬
pated the growth of globality when he wrote in Grundrisse that ‘capital by its
nature drives beyond every spatial barrier’ to ‘conquer the whole earth for its
market’ (1857-8: 524, 539). Thus on Marxist accounts globalization
happens because transworld connectivity enhances opportunities of profit
making and surplus accumulation. In particular, say Marxists, globalization
is a strategy that enables the capitalist, bourgeois, accumulating class to
increase its resources and power over the labouring, proletarian, exploited
class.

Marxists reject both liberalist and political realist explanations of global¬
ization. On Marxist accounts, the technological advances that enable global¬
ization have not been propelled, as liberalists argue, by ‘natural’ human
drives for economic growth, but by historically specific impulses of capitalist
development. Likewise, say Marxists, the legal and institutional infrastruc¬
tures that facilitate globalization have emerged not so much to spread market
efficiency across the planet, but to serve the logic of surplus accumulation on
a global scale. Meanwhile Marxists dismiss liberalist talk of ‘freedom’ and
‘democracy’ as being not real impulses behind increased transplanetary
connectivity, but a legitimating ideology for exploitative global capitalist
class relations. Similarly, for Marxists, state policies and inter-state struggles
for power are not, as political realists claim, the actual drivers of globaliza¬
tion, but rather expressions of deeper forces of capitalism and class struggle.
Dominant states may be exercising power when they promote globalization,
but they do so in the service of capital rather than in some notional ‘national
interest’.

Like liberalism and political realism, Marxist explanations of globaliza¬
tion have appeared in a variety of guises. More traditional Marxist argu¬
ments have focused on the growth of transplanetary circuits of capital
through global companies and global commodity flows, accompanied by the
consolidation of transworld networks among the capitalist class and
transworld fragmentation among the working class (cf. Burnham, 1997;
Harris, 1998-9; Pijl, 1998; Tabb, 2001). Meanwhile so-called neo-Marxists
in dependency and world-system theories have examined capital accumula¬
tion on a global scale more on lines of core and peripheral countries than in
terms of bourgeois and proletarian classes (cf. Wallerstein, 1979; Chase-
Dunn, 1989; S. Amin, 1997). What some have dubbed ‘neo-Gramscian’
accounts have highlighted the significance of underclass struggles to resist
globalizing capitalism: not only by traditional labour unions, but also by
new social movements of consumer advocates, environmentalists, peace
activists, peasants, and women (cf. Cox, 1987; Gill, 1993; Gills, 1997;
Mittelman, 2000).

Marxist approaches offer important contributions to understanding



130 Framework of Analysis


globalization. Attention to capitalism and class relations takes explanations
of growing transplanetary connectivity beyond liberalism and political real¬
ism to some of the deeper social forces that have generated relevant techno¬
logical advances, institutional developments, and state strategies. Marxist
accounts of capital and class also reveal a great deal about social power rela¬
tions and the generation of inequality in a globalizing economy.

Yet, much as political realism focuses too narrowly on state hierarchy, the
Marxist focus on class stratification likewise presents an overly restricted
account of power. Other relations of dominance and subordination have also
operated in globalization on lines of state, culture, gender, race, sexual orient¬
ation, (dis)ability and more. These additional structural inequalities and
violences certainly intersect with and are affected by class relations.
However, the workings of US hegemony, west-centric cultural domination,
masculinism, racism, heterosexism and ablism are not reducible to class
dynamics within capitalism. Thus weak states, aboriginals, women, people of
colour, sexual minorities and disabled persons have found good reason to
form cross-class solidarities in their respective struggles for emancipation and
social justice. Class is a key axis of power in globalization, but it is not the
only or always the most important one.

Likewise, it is too simplistic to explain globalization solely as a result of
drives for surplus accumulation. Capitalism accounts for a lot in globaliza¬
tion, but far from all. For example, people have not undertaken global
communications and global travel only to feed surplus accumulation, but
also to explore identities and investigate meanings. People have not acquired
global consciousness solely to supply capitalism with a mindset conducive to
transplanetary accumulation, but also owing to various other secular and
religious promptings. People have not developed global weapons and
pursued global military campaigns only for capitalist ends, but also due to
inter-state competition, masculinist behaviour, and militarist cultures that
predate capitalism.

In particular, Marxism is limited by its methodological materialism. The
approach is often characterized as one of ‘historical materialism’ and ‘politi¬
cal economy’, where ideational aspects of social relations are treated as
outcomes of, with no autonomy from, the mode of production. Yet it over¬
simplifies matters to suggest that culture and psychology are reducible to
political economy, that structures of identity and knowledge are wholly
results of, and entirely subordinate to, those of production and governance.
To take one example, nationalism as an identity structure has shaped capital¬
ism as well as vice versa. Likewise, aesthetics and language are more than by¬
products of accumulation. In short, while capitalism has played a key part in
generating globalization, social forces are more multidimensional, complex
and interesting than a narrow historical materialism posits.



Explaining Globalization 131


Constructivisms

In contrast to the methodological materialism of liberalist, political realist and
Marxist explanations of globalization, a range of other accounts have taken
methodologically idealist approaches. In these cases, transplanetary connec¬
tivity is said to have arisen because of the way that people have mentally
constructed the social world with symbols, language, interpretation, and so
on. From ideational perspectives, globalization has resulted from particular
forms and dynamics of consciousness. For methodological idealists, patterns
of production and governance are second-order structures that derive from
deeper cultural and socio-psychological forces. Such accounts of globalization
have come especially from the fields of Anthropology, Humanities, Media
Studies, and Sociology, although idealist arguments have also influenced some
researchers in Geography, Politics and even Business Studies.

One type of ideational explanation is constructivism, an approach that has
been popular particularly since the 1990s among International Studies scho¬
lars in North America and Western Europe who wish to develop an alterna¬
tive perspective to liberalism and political realism (Adler, 2003; Barnett,
2005). As the theory’s name suggests, constructivism concentrates on the
ways that social actors ‘construct’ their world: both within their own minds
and through inter-subjective communication with others. In particular,
constructivists examine how inter-subjective communication generates
common understandings of reality, shared norms for social behaviour, and
notions of group identity and solidarity. Conversation and symbolic
exchanges lead people to construct ideas of the world, rules for social inter¬
action, and ways of being and belonging in that world.

Constructivist research to date has not focused on explaining globaliza¬
tion; however, such an account can be extrapolated from existing works and
the general premises of the theory. These would suggest that transplanetary
connectivity has increased as people have reimagined society on transworld
rather than, or in addition to, country-national-state lines. By following inter-
subjective dialogue down new avenues, people would develop global-scale
understandings of social units, social rules and social identities. These mental
reorientations would in turn underpin a larger process of economic and polit¬
ical globalization.

Constructivist theory offers a helpful corrective to materialist explana¬
tions of globalization by affirming that social geography is a mental experi¬
ence as well as a physical fact. The growth of transplanetary connections is
indeed facilitated to the extent that people conceive of themselves as inhabit¬
ing a global world and as sharing values and interests with others spread
across the continents. Moreover, this mental reorientation to global identities
and solidarities would seem to result at least in part from inter-subjective
social-psychological dynamics of forming ‘in’ and ‘out’ groups of ‘us’ and



132 Framework of Analysis


‘them’. National, class, religious and other identities respond in part to mate¬
rial conditions like state power and capital accumulation, but group affilia¬
tions also depend on inter-subjective construction and communication of
shared self-understandings.

Yet constructivist explanations can also go too far down the road of
methodological idealism. In this case a social-psychological reductionism
unacceptably ignores the significance of economic and ecological forces in
shaping mental experience. What is needed is an explanation of globalization
that recognizes the significance of knowledge and identity but at the same
time interlinks ideational influences with material social forces.

Moreover, like liberalism, constructivist explanations are limited by their
neglect of issues of structural inequalities and power hierarchies in social
relations. With this apolitical tendency, constructivism fails to appreciate
that individuals who engage in inter-subjective communications invariably
do so under conditions of structural domination and subordination. As
often as not, the construction of social reality occurs in a context of political
struggle and as an expression of resistance. To take one obvious example,
national identities in the South developed largely through opposition to
colonial rule.


Postmodernisms

In contrast to constructivism, other ideational explanations of globalization
do highlight the significance of structural power in the construction of iden¬
tities, norms and knowledge. For shorthand convenience these approaches
are here grouped under a single label of ‘postmodernism’. However, others
have pursued this broad genre of argument under the names of ‘poststruc¬
turalism’ and ‘postcolonialism’.

Whatever the precise appellation, these perspectives understand society
first of all in terms of knowledge power: that is, how power structures shape
knowledge; and how certain knowledge structures support certain power
hierarchies. For example, one leading exponent of postmodernism, Michel
Foucault, has posited that each epoch is marked by a prevailing episteme, or
mode of knowledge (1966). This reigning structure of understanding (or
‘discourse’) determines what can and cannot be known in a given socio-
historical context: i.e., what passes as ‘truth’ and ‘real’; and what dissolves as
‘mythical’ and ‘imagined’.

For postmodernists the dominant framework of knowledge in ‘modern’
society is rationalism. This mode of understanding emphasizes the earthly
world, the subordination of nature to human control, objectivist science, and
instrumentalist efficiency. Modern rationalism breeds a society obsessed with
economic growth, technological control, bureaucratic surveillance, and disci¬
pline over desire. Moreover, say postmodernists, the rationalist mode of



Explaining Globalization 133


knowledge has an inherent expansionary logic that leads it through processes
of cultural imperialism to subordinate if not destroy other epistemologies.

Only a few postmodernist writings have focused on the problem of glob¬
alization per se (e.g. Luke, 1995; O Tuathail, 1996; Dirlif, 1997; Ling, 2000;
Cameron and Palan, 2004). Extrapolating from the general premises of the
theory, however, globalization could be understood as a process whereby
western rationalism imposes itself across the planet on indigenous cultures
and other non-modern life-worlds. Different authors in this genre have
linked knowledge power in the modern (globalizing) world with racism,
sexism and US hegemony (Said, 1978; Campbell, 1998; Chowdhry and
Nair, 2002).

With their emphasis on modes of knowledge as power, postmodernist and
postcolonialist arguments succeed in incorporating ideational elements into
explanations of globalization while also keeping questions of politics to the
fore. Postmodernist theories highlight the significance of modern rationalist
epistemology as a mindset that has been vital to the techno-scientific
advances and bureaucratic institutions that have made globalization possi¬
ble. Like Marxism, then, postmodernism helps to go beyond the relatively
superficial accounts of liberalism and political realism to the deeper social
conditions that have prompted globalization.

That said, postmodernist explanations also have their limitations. Where
Marxist accounts of globalization are restricted by their methodological
materialism, postmodernist arguments are constrained by their methodolog¬
ical idealism. Predominant discourses have most certainly had far-reaching
impacts on economy and ecology, but the notion that these material forces
can be reduced to modes of consciousness seems unsustainable. Again, what
is wanted is an explanation that interconnects ideational and material forces
rather than looking to one or the other.


Feminisms

For their part, feminist accounts of globalization have brought gender rela¬
tions to the fore. Whereas other theories have identified the principal dyna¬
mics behind the rise of transplanetary and supraterritorial connectivity in
terms of technology, state, capital, identity or discourse, feminists have put
the spotlight on the social construction of masculinity and femininity. That is,
the roles and behaviours assigned to biological sex are held to mould the over¬
all social order and significantly to shape the course of history, including the
spread of globality.

Feminist perspectives on globalization are adopted by researchers whose
main concerns lie with the status of women, particularly the structural subord¬
ination of women to men. These arguments stress that women have tended
to be marginalized, silenced and violated in global communications (e.g.,



134 Framework of Analysis


lower Internet access), global migration (e.g., abused domestics and sex
workers), global finance (e.g., limited availability of credit), global organiza¬
tions (e.g., few leadership positions), and global wars (e.g., rape on the battle¬
field). Feminist approaches to globalization have appeared across all fields of
social studies and humanities, albeit perhaps most frequently in Politics and
Sociology (Duggan and Dashner, 1994; Wichterich, 1998; Peterson and
Runyan, 1999; Signs, 2001; Peterson, 2003; Rai, 2004).

Many feminist arguments have come as corrective supplements to other
theories rather than as fully fledged explanations of globalization in their
own right. Thus, for example, feminist liberals have urged that more atten¬
tion be given to the inputs of and consequences for women in respect of the
laws and institutions that govern globalization. Feminist takes on political
realism have highlighted male dominance of state power and the masculinist
character of inter-state competition and war. Feminist contributions to
Marxist research have emphasized the pervasive gendered character of
surplus accumulation, for example, with low-paid female sweatshop work
and unpaid female domestic work. Feminist postmodernism has identified a
close relationship between masculinism and rationalist knowledge, while
feminist postcolonialism has highlighted the subordination of women in
imperialist contexts. In these different ways, much feminism has advocated
an ‘add-gender-and-stir’ approach to other theories.

Certain other feminist arguments have made gender relations themselves
the principal causal force in social relations. On these more radical accounts,
patriarchal subordination of women and masculinist behaviour patterns are
the primary forces that have generated other social structures such as capital¬
ism, the state, nationalism and rationalism. By a radical feminist logic, the
growth of transplanetary connections would also be driven in the first
instance by masculinist strivings and patriarchal oppressions.

Feminist accounts of globalization have provided welcome antidotes to
the gender-blindness that has generally afflicted other perspectives. Everyday
experience makes plain that people in global as in all other spaces act partly
in accordance with socially constructed sex roles. The ‘private’ sphere of the
household and intimate relations is obviously as integral and influential in
most people’s lives as the ‘public’ sphere of the workplace and citizenship.
The reproductive economy is clearly as central to the sustenance of social
relations as the productive economy. Yet ‘malestream’ research on globaliza¬
tion (and social life generally) has tended to render these crucial matters invis¬
ible.

That said, feminist explanations can overplay the significance of gender
relations, much as political realism can overemphasize inter-state competition
and postmodernism can overstress knowledge power. Arguments concerning
masculinism and patriarchy can clarify a great deal about the causes, courses
and consequences of globalization. However, the gender reductionism of a



Explaining Globalization 135


radical feminism that roots everything surrounding transplanetary connec¬
tivity in social constructions of sex roles seems overly simplistic. Hence, much
as Marxist preoccupations with class inequality can breed neglect of other
types of social subordination, so feminist focus on gender hierarchies can
distract attention from other important oppressions, for example, on lines of
culture and race.


Contending social explanations of globalization

Liberalisms

• main focus on markets

• globalization explained as a result of technological advances and the
construction of facilitating institutional infrastructures

Political realisms

• main focus on inter-state relations

• globalization explained in terms of competition among major states
and/or US hegemony

Marxisms

• main focus on the mode of production and class relations

• globalization explained as an outgrowth of capitalism

Constructivisms

• main focus on social construction of reality

• globalization explained in terms of mental (re)constructions of the
social world

Postmodernisms

• main focus on knowledge power

• globalization explained as a result of the imperialism of rationalism
Feminisms

• main focus on gender relations

• globalization explained as a product of masculinist behaviours and
patriarchal subordinations


An eclectic synthesis

The preceding assessment of six ideal-type social theories has identified a
number of possible explanations of globalization. Each approach highlights
certain forces that could contribute significantly to the large-scale growth of




136 Framework of Analysis


transplanetary connectivity in contemporary history: technology and institu¬
tion building in the case of liberalism; national interest and inter-state
competition in the case of political realism; capital accumulation and class
struggle in the case of Marxism; identity and knowledge construction in the
case of constructivism; rationalism and cultural imperialism in the case of
postmodernism; and masculinism and the subordination of women in the
case of feminism. On the other hand, each perspective is also limited by
reducing the dynamics of globalization to just one or two principal causes.

The approach in the present book is to synthesize insights from several
theoretical frameworks in a multifaceted explanation of globalization. In a
word, the perspective adopted here understands globalization as part of a
socio-historical dynamic involving five interrelated shifts in macro social
structures. One trend - the growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial
connectivity - is interlinked with four other developments: a shift from capi¬
talism towards hypercapitalism in respect of production; a shift from statism
towards polycentrism in respect of governance; a shift from nationalism
towards pluralism and hybridity in respect of identity; and a shift from
rationalism towards reflexive rationality in respect of knowledge.

The resultant account of globalization is not amenable to conventional
theory labels. The argument draws substantially from liberalism and political
realism regarding the significance of states and other governance arrange¬
ments, from Marxism regarding the importance of capitalism, from construc¬
tivism regarding the relevance of identity patterns, from postmodernism
regarding the role of knowledge power, and from feminism regarding the
pervasive significance of gender relations. The approach developed here,
therefore, does not fit a textbook category. Rather, the explanation weaves
together insights from these perspectives to form a distinctive (and in some
eyes no doubt peculiar) outlook.

The notion of ‘weaving together’ is key here. In other words, none of the
five highlighted trends (with respect to geography, production, governance,
identity and knowledge) is regarded as the original source of the other four.
Each is taken to be simultaneously cause and effect of the others.
Globalization is argued to be concurrently both an outcome of and an input
to other core aspects of contemporary social change. The rest of this chapter
indicates how developments around production, governance, identity and
knowledge have combined to generate large-scale globality. Then Chapters 5
to 8 consider how, conversely, intense globalization has contributed to
changes (as well as continuities) in the four other areas.


Forces of production in globalization

The contemporary rapid growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial social
connections has resulted partly from economic conditions. More specifically,



Explaining Globalization 137


globalization has unfolded in the context of certain turns in capitalist devel¬
opment. Although this book does not advance a Marxist argument that glob¬
alization can be understood entirely in terms of capitalism, no explanation of
this shift in geography would be complete without significant attention to the
capitalist mode of production.

Capitalism characterizes a social order where economic activity is oriented
first and foremost to the accumulation of surplus. In other words, capitalists
(who might be individuals, private firms, publicly owned enterprises, or other
collective actors) attempt to amass ever-greater resources in excess of their
survival needs. Capitalist production contrasts on the one hand with a
subsistence economy (where no surpluses arise) and on the other hand with
profligacy (where any surplus is immediately depleted through luxury
consumption). Under capitalism surpluses are invested in further production,
with the aim of acquiring additional surplus, which is then reinvested in still
more production, in the hope of obtaining still more surplus, and so on.

A capitalist economy is thoroughly monetized. Marx in this light charac¬
terized money as ‘the universal commodity’ of capitalist social relations
(1867: 89). Money greatly facilitates accumulation, particularly since
surpluses are easily stored and shifted in this fungible form. In addition, the
manipulation of value by means of monetary calculations (including prices,
wages, interest charges, dividends, taxes, currency revaluations, accounting
formulas, etc.) offers abundant opportunities to transfer surplus, especially
from the weak to the powerful.

Since most parties in a capitalist order are seeking to accumulate to one
degree or another, this mode of production involves perpetual and pervasive
contests over the distribution of surplus. Such competition occurs both
between actors (individuals, firms, etc.) and along structural lines (of class,
gender, race and more). Some of the struggles are overt, for example, in wage
disputes. Other conflicts remain latent, for instance, when many poor people
in the South are unaware that much of their country’s limited surplus value is
being transferred to wealthy people in the North through the repayment of
global debts. These and countless other experiences have shown historically
that capitalism tends to breed exploitation and other inequities unless delib¬
erate countervailing measures are implemented.

Surplus accumulation has transpired in one way or another for many
centuries, but capitalism is a comparatively recent phenomenon. When accum¬
ulation occurred in earlier times, it was temporary, limited, and involved
only small circles of people. Not until the past several hundred years has capi¬
tal become an ‘ism’, reigning as a foremost and ubiquitous framework of
production over large populations for sustained periods of time. From begin¬
nings in Western Europe around the fifteenth century, capitalism spread to all
continents over the next half-millennium (albeit to different degrees). Today
the structural power of capitalism is such that most people across the planet



138 Framework of Analysis


regard surplus accumulation as a ‘natural’ circumstance and can scarcely
imagine, let alone enact, an alternative mode of production.

Capitalism has spurred globalization in four principal ways: related to
market expansion, accounting practices, asset mobility, and enlarged arenas
of commodification. Regarding the first point, Marx and Engels wrote over
150 years ago that ‘the need of a constantly expanding market for its prod¬
ucts chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe’ (1848: 39).
Many firms have indeed pursued global markets as a means to increase their
sales volume. Greater turnover at a given rate of profit obviously yields larger
aggregate profits. Moreover, higher production runs to supply global
markets can bring significant economies of scale and thereby raise profit
margins. Capitalist enterprises have thus had major incentives to develop
transworld distribution and sales networks for global products. To make
transplanetary markets possible, capitalism has spurred much technological
innovation in communications, transport and data processing as well as
developments in global organization and management.

Second, capitalism has encouraged globalization inasmuch as global
accounting practices offer major opportunities to enhance accumulation. For
example, managers can vary and alter prices in a coordinated fashion across
transplanetary domains so that overall company profits are maximized.
Indeed, higher profit margins at mature market locations can allow a firm to
cover the temporary losses that might be involved in establishing new sites at
whatever other points on earth. A transworld pricing strategy can thereby
yield greater overall profits in the medium and long term.

In addition, manipulations of global accounting have given capitalists the
possibility to concentrate profits at points of low taxation within transplane¬
tary spaces. In territorialist circumstances, surplus was generally confined to
a particular state jurisdiction, and the capitalist was compelled to work
within its tax regime. However, by moving into the cyberspace of electronic
finance, capital can readily escape such territorial bounds. Profits that have in
practice been achieved, say, in Italy can through the ruses of so-called ‘trans¬
fer pricing’ be made to appear on the balance sheet of a Luxembourg
subsidiary with offshore taxation status. Likewise, ‘hinwis’ (‘high net worth
individuals’) may significantly reduce their tax charges by registering their
assets at offshore financial centres rather than in their country of residence.

Third, capitalism has promoted globalization owing to the opportunities
for enhanced accumulation offered by global sourcing. Capitalist interests
are well served when firms can place their production facilities wherever on
Earth the needed resources are most easily accessed and the costs are lowest.
Indeed, the fear of seeing globally mobile corporate assets go to more attrac¬
tive sites can induce territorially bound workers and governments to temper
demands regarding their share of surplus value vis-a-vis business.

In particular, global mobility has provided capitalists with an escape from



Explaining Globalization 139


the reduced rates of profit that accompanied corporatist arrangements in the
OECD countries by the late 1960s (cf. Marglin, 1988). True, in the mid-twen¬
tieth century corporatist compromises between big business, organized
labour and country government - epitomized in the Keynesian welfare state -
secured capitalism in the North by reducing overt class conflict at a time when
socialism was gaining unprecedented strength across much of the planet.
However, this stability was bought at a price of progressive taxation, consid¬
erable social insurance charges, and fairly tight guarantees of wide-ranging
workers’ rights. In these ways corporatism reduced the scope for accumula¬
tion by companies and investors. In contrast, contemporary globalization has
allowed big business to retrieve an advantaged position over government and
labour, inasmuch as capital thereby gained far greater transplanetary mobil¬
ity than the other two parties (Kurzer, 1993). Transworld relocations - or
merely the threat of such departures - have rebalanced the trilateral bargain
heavily in favour of large capital. Many workers and governments have felt
constrained to lower wages, corporate taxation, business regulation, and
various public expenditures on social security.

In broadly similar ways, globalization has offered capitalists a way to
counter the strategies of socialism and economic statism that rose in much of
the South during the mid-twentieth century. In the wake of large-scale decol¬
onization, many states in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and Latin America
took initiatives to control capitalist development within their jurisdictions.
These governments expropriated many assets and often introduced central¬
ized state planning of the country’s economy. Some voices in the South even
called for reparations from the North as compensation for past capitalist-
imperialist exploitation. However, increased transplanetary mobility has
given big (mainly North-based) capital a means to counter these efforts at a
major redistribution of world wealth. Indeed, apart from the major excep¬
tion of China, little remains of state socialism today in either the South or the
East.

Fourth and finally, capitalism has spurred globalization insofar as the
commodities that circulate in transplanetary spaces have offered major addi¬
tional opportunities for surplus accumulation. In other words, global
communications, global travel, global monies, global financial instruments
and global consumer goods have done more than enhance the possibilities for
accumulation through primary production and traditional manufacturing. In
addition, the information, communications, finance and consumer sectors
have offered vast potentials for further accumulation in their own right.
Indeed, telephone systems, Internet operations, foreign exchange dealing,
global retail chains and the like have often generated high profits. Thus, as is
further elaborated in Chapter 5, the very process of expanding global spaces
has been a boon to capitalism, so that globalization has been integral to the
emergence of what can be termed ‘hypercapitalism’.



140 Framework of Analysis


The preceding points should not be read to imply that every global capi¬
talist venture has yielded the expected windfalls. On the contrary, ‘going
global’ has hurt many corporations and investors who believed that this strat¬
egy offered a short, one-way street to superprofits. Global financial and
information industries in particular have experienced enormous volatility
over the past quarter-century, including major losses for some players.
Nevertheless, hopes of enhanced accumulation have continued to stimulate
accelerated globalization, and (as is detailed in Chapter 5) many of those
capitalist dreams have been substantially realized.

So capitalism clarifies a lot about why and how respatialization through
globalization has occurred. As David Harvey has said, ‘Capitalism cannot do
without its spatial fixes’ (2000: 54). A former social order marked by territor-
ialist geography, statist governance and nationalist identity well served an
earlier day of commercial and industrial capitalism. However, a different
spatial framework with considerable global aspects better serves the current
phase of capitalist development.

That said, capitalism has not generated contemporary globalization by
itself. For one thing, global capitalism has depended on regulatory arrange¬
ments and identity frameworks that have enabled surplus accumulation
though transplanetary spaces. In addition, the capitalist mode of production
has depended on the concurrent existence of a rationalist mode of knowledge
that creates the secular, anthropocentric, instrumentalist mindset through
which capitalism thrives. In short, as stressed earlier, the various principal
forces behind globalization have been co-dependent.


Forces of governance in globalization

As just noted, a mode of production cannot operate in the absence of an
enabling regulatory apparatus. Social relations are always marked by govern¬
ance mechanisms of some kind, even if the rules are sometimes loose, variable
or implicit. There is no such thing as an unregulated social context, and no
social change takes place in the absence of rules that stimulate, facilitate and
confirm the transformations. Hence globalization could not unfold without
governance arrangements that promote the process, and an explanation of
the trend must be sought partly in the regulatory realm.

The term ‘governance’ is subject to many different understandings
(Rhodes, 1997; Pierre, 2000; Hermet et al., 2005). In the present context the
word is taken to mean regulation in a generic sense; thus governance refers to
processes whereby people formulate, implement, enforce and review rules to
guide their common affairs. Much governance happens through government,
in the sense of regulatory activities through local and national public author¬
ities. However, governance can entail more than government. Governance
can extend beyond state and substate institutions to include suprastate



Explaining Globalization 141


(macro-regional and global) regimes as well. Moreover, governance can span
private regulatory mechanisms along with public sector arrangements. Hence
governance goes beyond government to cover the full scope of societal regu¬
lation.

Society might be considered to have a ‘mode’ of governance (a general way
of making, implementing, enforcing and reviewing rules), much as it has a
mode of production (a general way of extracting, processing, distributing and
consuming resources). Moreover, just as a mode of production may change
over time (say, from feudalism to capitalism, or from early to advanced capi¬
talism), so the prevailing structure of governance can also alter through
history. Indeed, as is discussed at length in Chapter 6, globalization has tran¬
spired in conjunction with a shift from a statist towards a polycentric mode of
regulation. Whereas statism concentrates the construction and application of
social rules in centralized national territorial governments, polycentrism
disperses regulation across multiple substate, state, suprastate and private
sites, as well as dense networks that interlink these many points of governance.

Hence it is perhaps not accidental that the words ‘globalization’ and
‘governance’ have entered common usage roughly simultaneously over the
past two decades. Inasmuch as ‘government’ tends to be associated with the
state, this notion does not apply comfortably as an umbrella term for the
polycentric condition of multi-scalar and diffuse regulation. The vocabulary
of ‘governance’ works better as a generic concept that covers statism, poly¬
centrism, and other modes of regulation.

To be sure, the end of statism in recent decades has by no means entailed
the end of the state. On the contrary, much of the regulation that has
advanced contemporary globalization has emanated from states.
Confounding the assumptions of many commentators, including those cited
in Chapter 1, globalization and the state have been anything but mutually
contradictory. On the contrary, most transplanetary relations would not
have developed - or would have grown far more slowly and ponderously - if
state policies had not encouraged globalization (Panitch, 1996; Weiss, 1998).
Even many neoliberalists like staff of the IMF and the World Bank have in the
past decade come to acknowledge the importance of the state for an effect¬
ively functioning global economy (Dhonte and Kapur, 1997; World Bank,
1997).

Globalization and the state have thus been quite compatible and indeed co¬
dependent in contemporary society. (That said, the growth of global relations
has in several important respects tended to alter the character of the state, as is
elaborated in Chapter 6.) State regulation has furthered globalization in four
principal ways: provision of infrastructure; liberalization of international
transactions; guarantees of property rights for global capital; and sponsorship
of global governance arrangements. At the same time, in keeping with emergent
polycentrism, states have not provided the entire regulatory infrastructure for



142 Framework of Analysis


accelerated globalization; hence the following discussion also notes contribu¬
tions from macro-regional, transworld, and private regimes.

Regarding infrastructure, state programmes have supplied much of the
initial transport, communications and organizational bases for transplane¬
tary links. In the nineteenth century states (including colonial administra¬
tions) supported or themselves undertook the construction of most key canals
and harbour facilities for expanded global shipping. In the twentieth century
states built most airports and sponsored most early airlines. States provided
many of the initial telecommunications networks, while the US military laid
the foundations for the Internet in the third quarter of the twentieth century.
States have furthermore advanced the organizational infrastructure of glob¬
alization by legalizing and often also actively promoting the operations of
thousands of global companies, global civil society associations, and (as elab¬
orated below) global governance institutions.

Regarding the liberalization of cross-border money and financial flows,
most states have in recent decades relaxed or abandoned foreign exchange
controls, thereby greatly facilitating global movements of currency. As of
2004 a total of 158 states had accepted Article VIII of the IMF, under which
they undertake not to impose any restrictions on payments related to cross-
border trade in goods and services (IMF, 2004). Dozens of states (starting
with the USA in 1974 and the UK in 1979) have also removed restrictions on
capital movements in and out of their jurisdictions (Helleiner, 1994;
Kapstein, 1994).

On the other hand, states have thus far baulked at proposals to amend the
IMF Articles of Agreement to require all members of the organization to
remove statutory controls on cross-border capital flows. Likewise, although
the OECD has promoted liberalization of capital movements since its incep¬
tion in the early 1960s, intergovernmental negotiations through that body in
1995-8 towards a Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI) failed to
establish a general ‘free flow’ principle under which states would not discrim¬
inate between capital of foreign and domestic origin. Instead, national
governments have concluded thousands of bilateral investment treaties
(BITs) that collectively have had broadly the same effect as an MAI
(UNCTAD, 2004: 6).

A host of other state measures have also encouraged the growth of global
finance. For example, numerous national governments have amended legis¬
lation to allow nonresident ownership of bonds and equities on securities
markets within their jurisdiction. In addition, scores of states have since the
1980s established rules to permit entry into their country of global banks and
global securities firms. The proliferation of offshore finance facilities has like¬
wise required states to construct enabling statutory frameworks. As previ¬
ously indicated in Chapter 3, states and/or substate governments have also
created hundreds of offshore manufacturing sites; thus many companies have



Explaining Globalization 143


opted for global production partly because of the regulatory bait laid by
country and provincial authorities in EPZs.

States’ liberalization of cross-border trade has also encouraged the growth
of global production and global markets. It is clearly harder to pursue global
commerce when government-imposed tariffs, quotas, licensing procedures,
technical standards, subsidies and other regulatory measures favour intra¬
state over cross-border transactions. Already some trade liberalization in the
second half of the nineteenth century aided the early development of global
products. Then high protectionism in the second quarter of the twentieth
century discouraged further growth of transplanetary markets (outside inter¬
continental colonial empires, that is). Thereafter eight rounds of multilateral
negotiations between 1948 and 1994 under the GATT reduced average
import duties on manufactures from over 40 per cent to only 3 per cent. More
recently, the WTO regime has encouraged states also to liberalize cross-
border trade in agriculture and various service sectors.

Other state-led trade liberalization conducive to global production,
exchange and consumption has occurred through regional agreements. The
past half-century has witnessed the creation of multiple regional free trade
areas (FTAs), customs unions, and (in the case of the EU) a common market.
FTAs are regional associations of states with zero-tariffs between the member
countries. These schemes have appeared in - or are currently projected for -
most of Europe, the Americas, South Asia, South East Asia, Southern Africa,
and elsewhere. Particularly in Europe, FTAs and customs unions (the latter
involve the introduction of a common external tariff as well as the abolition
of internal tariffs) have greatly encouraged global investment.

Along with infrastructure projects and liberalization measures, a third
general way that states have advanced globalization has been through guar¬
antees of property rights for global capital. Legally enforced support of
ownership claims has of course been integral to capitalist development for
several centuries, and the globalization of accumulation processes has consti¬
tuted no exception. Firms would be far less inclined to invest in multiple
jurisdictions across the planet if host states did not erect and uphold property
laws that protected business and investor interests. Whereas many govern¬
ments undertook nationalizations and expropriations of corporate assets in
the third quarter of the twentieth century, the tendency since the 1980s has
been to shower companies with legal protections and to privatize the greater
part of state enterprises, often transferring the ownership to global capital.

States have also encouraged the globalization of capital by constructing
multilateral regimes that guarantee intellectual property rights (IPRs) such as
patents, trademarks, copyrights, and designs. In the late nineteenth century,
governments erected global agreements like the Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property (1883), the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (1886), and the Madrid Agreement



144 Framework of Analysis


for the International Registration of Marks (1891). In more recent times, the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) has seen the annual
number of applications for global patents rise from under 3,000 in 1979 to
over 54,000 in 1997 (HDR, 1999: 67). The 1994 Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) strengthened guar¬
antees of IPRs in global markets through the WTO. Meanwhile two
intergovernmental treaties concluded at the end of 1996 have extended copy¬
right law to cyberspace.

Developments around IPRs illustrate a fourth manner that states have
sponsored a regulatory environment that is conducive to globalization,
namely, through the creation of transworld governance mechanisms. For
reasons elaborated in Chapter 6, transplanetary and supraterritorial links
cannot be administered through territorially based arrangements alone.
Globalization also requires significant elements of global governance: that is,
rules and permanent regulatory bodies with a transworld scope. Most of
these global regimes (covering inter alia communications, conflict manage¬
ment, ecology, finance, health, human rights and trade) have been established
through intergovernmental agreements. With time, bodies like the Bretton
Woods institutions and the United Nations agencies have acquired some
autonomy from their member states. Nevertheless, most global governance
has emerged and grown through states and inter-state relations, and it is hard
to see how it could have done otherwise. True, as elaborated in Chapter 6,
some important contemporary global governance has developed not through
the public sector, but through private institutions like the International
Securities Market Association (ISMA) and the Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). However, this market-based
governance has required at least the acquiescence of states, and often it has
had their active encouragement, too.

Once in place, transworld governance institutions have greatly furthered
globalization through standardization. Needless to say, transplanetary
connectivity has been facilitated to the degree that people across the earth
have come to operate with similar bureaucratic, legal and technical arrange¬
ments. For example, the ITU has issued hundreds of recommendations
governing technical standards in electronic mass media and telecommunica¬
tions, running to more than 10,000 pages in all. Meanwhile the International
Organization for Standardization has published over 10,000 measures cover¬
ing pretty well all areas of technology (UIA, 1998: 1093). The Warsaw
Convention of 1929 (amended in 1955) has prescribed a transworld format
for airline operations, while the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) has overseen global rules for air navigation, inter alia to prevent in¬
flight collisions. The OECD has promulgated a Model Tax Convention to
further the standardization of bilateral tax treaties that have proliferated with
the globalization of capital. Several private-sector associations like the



Explaining Globalization 145


International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and the International
Federation of Accountants (IFAC) have since the 1970s developed global
guidelines for corporate accounting and auditing. The International
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), created in 1983, has
promoted transplanetary standards for stock and bond markets, while the
International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), formed in 1994,
has done the same for the insurance business. Starting in 1996, the IMF has
coordinated major initiatives to set global frameworks for the calculation
and presentation of macroeconomic statistics. The WHO has promoted
regulatory harmonization in the area of disease control, while other parts of
the UN system have overseen the codification of universal standards of
human rights.

In sum, then, a host of measures especially from states - but also from
regional, transworld, and private regulatory institutions - have together
provided a major governance input to globalization. The construction of a
supportive legal infrastructure has not been the sole cause of globalization,
but the trend could not have developed without this administrative ground¬
ing. This is not to say that every regulation in contemporary history has
favoured the growth of transplanetary connectivity. Certain state actions
have inhibited globalization, for example, with bans on Internet software,
harassment of transworld civil society activities, and discouragement of
global capital flows. Moreover, state restrictions on immigration have rarely
been as tight as at the start of the twenty-first century. However, the balance
of relevant regulation has greatly favoured globalization.

Indeed, states and other governance bodies have been heavily constrained
to establish regulatory arrangements that facilitate the expansion of global
social spaces. Conditions in respect of capitalism (discussed above), together
with circumstances related to identity and knowledge (discussed below), as
well as the sheer momentum of global respatialization itself, have put policy¬
makers under considerable pressure to provide supportive frameworks of
rules. Given the strength of these other forces, it seems highly unlikely that
regulators could have blocked most or all globalization had they wished to do
so. Even governments with strong reservations about globalization have
succumbed to at least a partial accommodation of the trend. Thus, for exam¬
ple, the King of Bhutan no longer outlaws television (as he once tried to do),
and Fidel Castro’s Soviet-style regime has actively promoted global tourism
for Cuba. To this extent the question has been less whether regulators would
enable globalization and more what kind of regulatory frameworks they
would erect to govern the process. Contemporary policymakers cannot deny
the growth of transworld relations, but they do have a variety of options for
shaping the trend in certain directions rather than others.

What of the particular role of the US state in generating contemporary
globalization, given the significance that some political realist theories attach



146 Framework of Analysis


to the role of a hegemon in world politics? US governments have often played
a pivotal role in the regulatory developments described above. For example,
US administrations were key proponents of the establishment of the UN, the
Bretton Woods institutions, the OECD, and the GATT/WTO. The US state
has also actively supported the creation of macro-regional regimes that have
facilitated globalization, especially in Europe and the Americas. In addition,
the very name ‘Washington Consensus’ identifies where pressure for liberal¬
ization of global trade and finance has been strongest. The political culture of
US foreign policy has also had several historically entrenched traits that esp¬
ecially encourage the development of global connectivity (Thorne, 1992). For
instance, the metaphor of the melting pot suggests that all of humanity has
crossed the planet to realize the American dream, hooking outward, prevail¬
ing US myths have affirmed that America is an exceptional society with a
mission to bring liberty and prosperity to every corner of the earth. Where
ideological persuasion has failed, the US state has had unequalled military
resources to further its favoured path of globalization by force of arms
(Mosler and Catley, 2000).

However, recognizing the far-reaching influence of the US state in shaping
contemporary globalization is not the same as arguing that US hegemony has
been a necessary condition for, and primary cause of, intense growth of trans¬
planetary connectivity since the middle of the twentieth century. US pre¬
eminence among states has deeply affected the type of accelerated
globalization that has occurred over the past 50 years, but US primacy has not
generated globalization itself. Other pervasive and deeply embedded forces in
respect of regulation, capitalist production, identity dynamics and rationalist
knowledge would in any case have generated the past half-century of large-
scale globalization. However, globalization would have proceeded in differ¬
ent directions in the absence of a dominant US state. Likewise, as is stressed
in Chapter 12, US policies will greatly condition the possibilities for more
progressive future courses of globalization.


Forces of identity in globalization

Thus far this explanation of contemporary globalization has concentrated on
political-economic forces; however, in keeping with the premise that a fuller
explanation needs to synthesize material and ideational elements, the rest of
this account highlights psychological and cultural dynamics at the core of
globalization. The next paragraphs examine impulses to the growth of trans¬
planetary connectivity coming from the area of identity construction, while
the last section considers the significance of forces related to knowledge.

As seen earlier in this chapter, many theories underplay (and in some cases
utterly neglect) the role of identity in social life. However, people engage with
one another in society not only to obtain resources and to exercise power, but



Explaining Globalization 147


also to discover who they are, where they belong, and what they might
become. Understanding and affirming the self - both as an individual and as
a group member - is a prime motivation for, and major preoccupation of,
social interaction. People seek in social relations to explore their class, their
gender, their nationality, their race, their religious faith, their sexuality, and
other aspects of their being. Constructions of identity moreover provide
much of the basis for social bonds, including collective solidarity against
oppression. Notions of identity underpin frameworks for community,
democracy, citizenship and resistance. In short, identity matters (a great
deal).

Society may be said to have a ‘mode of identity’ (a general way of defining
and expressing who people are) alongside its mode of production and its
mode of governance. Prior to the onset of intense globalization half a century
ago, the prevailing structure of identity was nationalism. (In this context
‘nationalism’ is not taken to mean unbridled patriotism, but a circumstance
where people construct their being, belonging and becoming first and fore¬
most in terms of national affiliation. The concept of nationhood is further
elaborated in Chapter 7.) Like structures of production and governance,
modes of identity change over time. As indicated in Chapter 7, globalization
has unfolded in tandem with - both reflecting and reinforcing - a broad shift
in the reigning framework of identity from nationalism towards greater
pluralism and hybridity.

Forces of identity have causal significance in social relations. Identity is not
reducible to, and wholly an outcome of, forces of geography, production and
governance. Certainly the rise of nationalism as the previously prevailing
mode of identity was greatly encouraged by concurrently predominant
patterns of social space (territorialism), economy (industrial capitalism), and
regulation (statism). These four structures had strongly parallel logics in an
earlier time. Similarly, the recent emergences of supraterritorial space, hyper¬
capitalist production, and polycentric governance have spurred the contem¬
porary turn towards more plural and hybrid identities. These four
developments, too, have been largely complementary. However, identity
cannot be wholly understood as an outcome of economics, geography and
politics. Social-psychological processes also have dynamics of their own, and
causality has simultaneously operated in converse directions, with identity
having impacts on space, production and governance. Thus nationalism
helped to promote territorialism, capitalism and statism in an earlier day, and
more plural and hybrid identities have tended to feed more globality, hyper¬
capitalism and poly centrism in recent times.

Circumstances surrounding the construction of identities have promoted
globalization in three main ways. First, national ‘selves’ have been substan¬
tially formed and sustained in relation to foreign ‘others’ within a transworld
realm. Second, a number of nations have developed in part as transplanetary



148 Framework of Analysis


diasporas. Third, increased attention to various nonterritorial identities (like
those based in faith, gender and race) has promoted the growth of supraterri-
torial social connections more generally.

Regarding the first of these three influences, it is often mistakenly assumed
that national identities have developed endogenously out of some primordial
essence of a self-contained territorial home environment. Certainly the
particular characteristics of each nation - its language, its customs, its art
forms, its sensibilities, etc. - arise largely from local circumstances. However,
the consolidation of such distinctive features into a large collective national
identity has invariably occurred in the context of wider world contacts. In
other words, inter-national relations have provided a core dynamic for the
construction of nations themselves. The process of nation building has
thereby drawn social relations into global realms.

National identities have several striking inter-national qualities (Scholte,
1995: 191-4; Scholte, 1996: 567-71). For example, definitions of nation¬
hood have always rested on claims to difference and uniqueness of one group
vis-a-vis the rest of the humanity. National ‘selves’ have been constructed in
terms of contrasts with external ‘others’; the content of the national ‘us’ has
invariably been defined in relation to the foreign ‘them’. Thus nineteenth-
century imperialism did much to consolidate nationalism in Western Europe.
Indeed, national identities have characteristically been established through
the exclusion of ‘outsiders’ in the rest of the world. Nationality has intrinsi¬
cally been a question of privilege within an inter-national sphere. In addition,
nations have generally emerged and/or been sustained in the context of self-
protective reactions against interventions from afar. Thus inter-national
warfare, commercial rivalries and cultural intrusions have spurred many a
nationalist reaction. At the same time, many national campaigns have
depended on support from inter-national sponsors in the broader world. For
example, the USA with its Monroe Doctrine supported national assertions in
Latin America during the nineteenth century. Similarly, Bolshevik Russia
promoted national projects in Central Asia in the early twentieth century.
Japanese occupiers advanced national programmes in the colonies of South
East Asia during World War II. The UN has championed Timorese and other
national self-determination struggles in recent decades.

Contrary to many intuitions, then, the affirmation of national identities
has on the whole actually spurred rather than slowed globalization. Nations
have only looked inward within the purported homeland to the extent that
they have simultaneously looked outward to the wider (and eventually
global) world. Nationality and globality have been largely co-dependent in
the area of identity, much as the state and globality have been substantially
mutually reinforcing in the area of governance.

Indeed, many nations have spread across the planet in global diasporas
(Cohen, 1997). Prominent examples include the Chinese and Palestinian



Explaining Globalization 149


nations. Although these diasporas have constructed their identities with
reference to a particular territorial homeland, in fact they have existed as
transworld networks. Diasporas have given impetus to globalization through
their efforts to maintain connections with the country of origin as well as
among various outposts across the planet. Thus, for example, the diaspora of
Filipina care workers has played its part in deepening global finance with
large-scale remittances to the home islands. Meanwhile associations like the
World Union of Free Romanians have contributed to the globalization of civil
society.

Other impulses to the growth of transplanetary connectivity have come
from the affirmation of supraterritorial identities. Constructions of the self
and group affiliations in terms of age, class, gender, race, religious faith, and
sexual orientation intrinsically transcend territorial place, distance and
borders to encompass people dispersed across the earth. For example, the
spread of world religions provided significant stimulus for prototypical glob¬
alization in previous epochs. Incipient globalization of the nineteenth and
early twentieth century gained boosts from transworld working class solidar¬
ities of the socialist and communist internationals, transworld racial solidar¬
ities of Pan-Africanism and the White Commonwealth, and transworld
women’s solidarities in the first wave of feminism. In addition to these
supraterritorial identities, recent accelerated globalization has had encour¬
agements from global youth culture and transworld expressions of lesbian,
gay, bisexual and transgender identities, as described further in Chapter 7.

In several ways, then, forces of identity have operated alongside those
connected with production and governance to promote a significant expan¬
sion of global relations in contemporary social life. In turn, the rise of dia¬
sporas and supraterritorial solidarities through globalization, together with
the continuing importance of various forms of nationality, have contributed
to a shift in the prevailing structure of identity from nationalism towards
greater pluralism and hybridity. This aspect of globalization and social
change is explored more fully in Chapter 7.


Forces of knowledge in globalization

Next to identity, other significant ideational spurs to globalization have come
in the area of knowledge. The theoretical perspective adopted here agrees
with those schools of social and political thought which maintain that the
way that people know their world has significant implications for the
concrete circumstances of that world. Hence globalization has occurred in
part because of certain powerful patterns of social consciousness. Knowledge
frameworks have a significance that is not reducible to forces of production,
governance and identity. In short, the rise of globality could not transpire in
the absence of mindsets that encourage such a development.



150 Framework of Analysis


Modern rationalism is a general configuration of knowledge that has
greatly promoted the spread of global thinking and, through it, the broader
trend of globalization (Boli and Thomas, 1999; Drori et al., 2003). This
framework of knowledge has four main distinguishing features. First, ration¬
alism is secularist: it defines reality in terms of the tangible earthly world,
without reference to transcendent and divine forces. Second, rationalism is
anthropocentric: it understands reality primarily in terms of human interests,
activities and conditions (rather than, for example, in terms of ecological
systems). Third, rationalist knowledge has a ‘scientist’ character: it holds that
phenomena can be understood in terms of single incontrovertible truths that
are discoverable by rigorous application of objective research methods.
Fourth, rationalism is instrumentalist: it assigns greatest value to insights that
enable people efficiently to solve immediate problems.

When secular, anthropocentric, scientific, instrumental rationality reigns
as the predominant knowledge structure, it tends to subordinate other ways
of understanding and acting upon the world. Rationalism elevates one kind
of ‘making sense’ over all others. Rationalists readily dismiss aesthetics, spir¬
ituality, emotion, and fantasy - or rather accept these and other ‘irrationali¬
ties’ only inasmuch as they complement, advance, or at least do not interfere
with rational knowledge. ‘Irrationality’ is not seen to contain any important
truth in its own right.

Indeed, rationalism is something of a (secular) faith. Rationalists maintain
that science enables humanity to discover a single, definitive, objective truth
about each phenomenon. This knowledge could then be applied to harness
natural and social forces for human purposes. Techno-scientific rationality
would thereby allow people to conquer disease, hunger, poverty, war, etc.,
and as a result to maximize the potentials of human life.

The effects of rationalist knowledge are manifested in all that is regarded as
‘reasonable’ in modern society. For example, rationalism has prompted
modern people to separate ‘society’ from ‘nature’ and to seek through scien¬
tific and technical means to subordinate natural forces for instrumental
human ends. Secular, anthropocentric, instrumental calculations have also
provided a knowledge framework for capitalist production and a cult of
economic efficiency. A rationalist mindset has likewise underlain the power
of ‘objective’ secular law in modern social relations and the pervasiveness of
bureaucracy in modern organizations (governments, firms, civil society associa¬
tions, schools, hospitals and so on). Rationalism has furthermore propelled
the production of scientific knowledge through universities and think tanks.

Like any social structure, rationalism is a product of history. It has arisen
at particular times and places under particular conditions. True, instances of
secular, anthropocentric, scientific, instrumental thinking can be found in
various pre-modern contexts. However, a rationalist social structure - one
that systematically marginalizes other forms of knowing - is distinctive of



Explaining Globalization 151


modern society. Rationalism first consolidated in the so-called
‘Enlightenment’ that took hold in the North Atlantic area during the eight¬
eenth century. Enlightenment thought removed the label of ‘knowledge’ from
myth, faith and other ‘traditional’ ways of understanding. Subsequently
rationalism has been carried, particularly through colonialism and informal
imperialism, to all corners of the earth.

Rationalist thought has encouraged the rise of globality in several general
ways. For one thing, this structure of knowledge has laid an ideational basis
for the principal material causes of globalization. The reliance of capitalist
production on rationalist knowledge has already been noted. In addition,
rationalist frameworks of law and institutional organization have formed a
backdrop for the regulatory frameworks that have encouraged globalization.

Other impulses to create global social spaces have come from the logic of
rationalism itself. For example, the secularism of rationalism has encouraged
people to construct ‘the whole’ of their existence in terms of planet earth
rather than, say, in terms of the divine. Indeed, before the sixteenth century
‘maps’ of ‘the world’ often depicted relations between people and their god(s)
as well as, or instead of, some terrestrial realm. For a secularist mindset, truth
comes in the form of earthly - indeed, global - principles that transcend the
particularities of locality and prevail for humankind across whatever territo¬
rial distances and borders. A number of significant impulses to globalization
have therefore come from efforts to discover transplanetary realities. This
quest has motivated both so-called ‘explorers’ of earlier times and global
travellers of recent generations. Rationalism encourages a belief that people
can maximize knowledge when they access and understand the earthly world
as a whole. Globalization can be seen, in part, as the pursuit of this secularist
holy grail.

Meanwhile the anthropocentrism of rationalism has directed social
consciousness to the space occupied by humanity, namely, planet Earth. In an
anthropocentric conception, the cosmos is seen not as a metaphysical realm
of the gods, nor as a biosphere of interdependent life forms, nor as the local¬
ized domain of a particular tribe. Rather, the rationalist lens focuses on the
space of homo sapiens, that is, on the planet as a single place. This conception
of the Earth as the human home within the universe, too, has provided a
crucial mental orientation for globalization.

The scientism and instrumentalism of rationalism have also been
conducive to globalization. Scientific knowledge is nonterritorial: the truths
revealed by ‘objective’ method are purportedly valid for anyone, anywhere,
anytime on earth. This objectivist orientation can feed expectations that
certain products, regulations, technologies, art forms and the like can apply
across the planet. Meanwhile territorialism (especially the hindrances of state
borders) has frequently contradicted utilitarian notions of efficiency. For
example, the instrumentalist logic of mainstream economic analysis has held



152 Framework of Analysis


that territorial distance should be overcome and territorial borders should
fall in order to achieve the most productive world division of labour.

In a variety of ways, then, rationalist thinking has encouraged the
growth of a global imagination and the various material transworld activi¬
ties (communications, markets, travel, etc.) that global thinking promotes.
For two hundred years, the Enlightenment mindset has in important
respects opposed the principle of a territorial division of society. As Martin
Albrow has succinctly put it, ‘Reason knows no territorial limits’ (1996:
32).

Conclusion

In sum, then, the perspective adopted in this book explains globalization as
an outcome of multifaceted dynamics of social relations. Not every impulse
of production, governance, identity and knowledge has advanced globaliza¬
tion. Moreover, conditions in some social settings have been more conducive
to an expansion of transplanetary connectivity than others: e.g., the New
York Stock Exchange as against subsistence farms in Uzbekistan. However,
the balance of forces in contemporary society has heavily favoured the emer¬
gence of a more global world.

Indeed, the explanation of globalization outlined above suggests that the
growth of transplanetary connections between people is unlikely to reverse in
the foreseeable future. The various dynamics of capitalism, state and other
regulation, national and other identity construction, and rationalism are
deeply embedded in large parts of contemporary society, including its most
powerful quarters. In combination, these forces have generated enormous
momentum for globalization. To be sure, as is particularly stressed in Part III
of this book, policymakers as well as citizens at large have ample opportuni¬
ties to affect the speeds, directions and consequences of growing globality.
However, it is hard to see how political action could stop, let alone reverse,
the powerful combination of forces that are currently assembled behind this
reconfiguration of social space. Only a possible systemic ecological calamity
would appear to stand in the way of continuing large-scale globality and
considerable further globalization in the period ahead.

The account of globalization presented here is admittedly complex. It
explains contemporary globalization in terms of interrelations between four
aspects of capitalism, five features of state and other governance, three qual¬
ities of national and other identity construction, and four implications of
rationalist knowledge. Such an approach violates the demands of conven¬
tional social science for parsimony. Why not, some critics might object,
explain globalization more simply as the result of one main cause such as
technology, or US power, or capitalism, or cultural imperialism?



Explaining Globalization 153


Principal dynamics of globalization

Capitalist production

• global markets to increase sales volumes and enhance economies of
scale

• global accounting of prices and tax liabilities to raise profits

• global sourcing to reduce costs of production

• supraterritorial commodities to increase the channels of accumulation

Regulation

• governance agencies’ provision of the infrastructure to effect global
connections

• states’ liberalization of cross-border transactions

• legal guarantees of property rights for global capital

• establishment and growth of transworld governance mechanisms

• transplanetary standardization of technical specifications, legal princi¬
ples and administrative procedures

Identity construction

• national ‘selves’ constituted in relation to foreign ‘others’ within a
global realm

• assertions of various national identities through transplanetary
diasporas

• affirmations of various nonterritorial identities through transworld
networks

Rationalist knowledge

• secularist constructions of the social world in terms of planet earth

• anthropocentric orientation to the planetary home of the human
species

• scientific notions of objective truths with transplanetary validity

• instrumentalist efficiency arguments against ‘irrational’ territorial divi¬
sions


The view adopted here is that more compact formulas of the kind covered
in the first half of this chapter are oversimplified and omit more than is
acceptable. Shorthand equations tend to offer highly partial explanations and
illusory degrees of predictive powers. Moreover, in terms of theory-practice
relations, policies and actions based on excessively narrow understandings of
globalization can produce substantial harm through omission. Thus, for
example, political engagement of globalization from perspectives like liberal¬
ism and Marxism has often wrought considerable cultural violence, however




154 Framework of Analysis


unintended, because these theories brush over issues of identity and knowl¬
edge. Meanwhile constructivist theories have generally been insufficiently
sensitive to the power relations of social hierarchies, while the relative
economic illiteracy of postmodernist approaches can have unhappy conse¬
quences for material welfare.

In contrast, a more complex explanation that is alert to an intricate combi¬
nation of multiple forces could encourage the development of more viable
positive policies towards globalization. Indeed, this book’s ‘critical introduc¬
tion’ is meant to promote more secure, equitable and democratic courses of
globalization. The approach developed above constantly turns the spotlight
on insecurity, inequality and marginalization within globalization to date, in
the hopes of fostering future globalizations that limit - or better yet overcome
- these violences.

Of course, some readers will find this critical theory to be insufficiently
radical, or to be radical in the wrong ways. For example, eco-centric thinkers
and activists may object that the approach taken here gives insufficient atten¬
tion to globalization as a process of environmental degradation. Feminists
may argue that gender relations should figure more centrally than they do in
this account. Indigenous peoples may regard the theory of globalization
developed here as yet another manifestation of the imperialism of westernist-
modernist-rationalist knowledge. Theists may reject the secularist character
of the theory and its failure to grasp the possibilities that globalization offers
for spiritual revival. Anarchists may say that the argument does not suffi¬
ciently challenge what they take to be the inherently oppressive nature of
states and other bureaucratic governance frameworks.

Admittedly, like any theory, this account embodies and furthers certain
interests and values. The approach here tries to be ecologically aware while
keeping the principal focus on social problems. It seeks to promote gender
sensitivity while also keeping attention on other social hierarchies such as
inequalities related to class, culture and race. The argument attempts to be
reflexively rationalist: that is, to maximize the emancipatory potentials of
modern knowledge while recognizing that modernity has tendencies towards
ecological destruction, bureaucratic oppression, spiritual vacuum, and
suppression of other life-worlds. To theists and anarchists one can only
answer that, for better or for worse, the author has a secularist outlook and a
faith in the potentials of formal public regulation to improve the human
condition. Theory cannot but rest, in part, on the theorist’s politics.



Part II


Change and Continuity



Has globalization changed the social order? If so, in what ways and to what
extent have such changes taken place? Chapters 2 and 3 have shown that the
large-scale rise of transplanetary and more specifically supraterritorial
connections between people has significantly shifted the geography of
contemporary society. But has this respatialization also reverberated more
widely to alter other primary social structures?

Chapter 4 examined forces in contemporary history that have generated -
and seem likely to continue generating - a major expansion of global social
spaces. These causes of globalization were seen to emanate from interrelated
spheres of production, governance, identity and knowledge. The next chap¬
ters investigate reverse causalities, whereby developments in geography are
not only an outcome of, but simultaneously also an influence on, circum¬
stances in the other four aspects of social relations.

Hence the central question for the second part of the book is whether glob¬
alization, an important respatialization of social relations, has encouraged
broader changes of social structure. Chapter 5 considers the consequences of
contemporary globalization for the mode of production. Chapter 6 assesses
the implications of widespread transplanetary connectivity for the apparatus
of governance. Chapter 7 explores the repercussions of greater transworld
relations for patterns of identity. Chapter 8 examines the effects of globaliza¬
tion on social structures of knowledge.

Taken together, the overall conclusion of these chapters is that unprece¬
dented growth of transplanetary links during the past half-century has
involved an intricate interplay of changes and continuities. Not utter
transformation or full constancy, but blended shifts and perpetuations. In
Chapter 2 it was established that contemporary globalization has brought
an end to territorialist geography, but together with a persistence of
socially significant territorial spaces. Following a similar theme of mixed
change and continuity, Chapter 5 indicates that globalization has encour¬
aged the development of various different forms of accumulation, while
also reinforcing older forms and furthering the maintenance of the overall
capitalist mode of production. Chapter 6 shows that large-scale trans¬
planetary relations have helped to make statist regulation non-viable, but
also that the state retains a major role in the emergent polycentric structure
of governance. Chapter 7 notes likewise that intense transworld connec¬
tivity has contributed to undermine the previous effective monopoly of the
nationality principle on constructions of social identity, although nation¬
hood remains an important element in current more plural and hybrid
identities. Finally, Chapter 8 argues that recent large-scale globalization
has tended to qualify the hold of rationalism as the prevailing knowledge
structure, although modern rationality continues to have a central place in
contemporary, more global society.

As is ever the case in history, nothing involves total change or total


156



Change and Continuity 157


continuity. Globalization has promoted important shifts in social structures,
but not a complete social transformation. The trend has accommodated
important continuities, but not a complete historical standstill.
Contemporary intense globalization has been a notable force of social
change, but the shifts to date have not been so great as to constitute an
epochal transition from one historical age to another.

In any case, as will already be apparent from Chapter 4, this book does not
maintain that globalization is the only or primary cause of the changes and
continuities that are described in the next chapters. The discussion is there¬
fore couched in a language whereby globalization has ‘encouraged’,
‘promoted’, ‘helped’, and ‘furthered’ various trends, rather than ‘producing’,
‘generating’, ‘determining’ or ‘necessitating’ them. According to the perspec¬
tive adopted here, the full causal force behind developments in geography,
production, governance, identity and knowledge lies in their interrelations
and mutual determination. Hence globalization is only one of several key
forces in the dynamics of current history, and thus only part of a multifaceted
explanation of social change.

On a methodological note, readers may ask how it can be established that
globalization has the causal significance claimed for it in the following chap¬
ters. How can we know that globalization has been causally important? This
question raises deep problems in the philosophy of explanation that cannot
be fully addressed here. However, in brief, the arguments presented here
about the significance of globalization for social change can be defended on a
combination of four broad grounds. First, theory (on the lines laid out in the
second half of Chapter 4) generates a logically coherent supposition that
globalization as a reconfiguration of spatial structure should manifest inter¬
connections with concurrent developments in production, governance, iden¬
tity and knowledge structures. Second, extensive empirical evidence (as
elaborated in Chapters 5 to 8) confirms multiple correlations in times and
places between globalization and these other social trends. Third, countless
actors who have lived through the experiences described in these chapters
have given testimony (in interviews and writings documented here) that glob¬
alization has had the sorts of effects indicated. Fourth, counterfactual think¬
ing (i.e., imagining that globalization had not unfolded, on the lines covered
in Chapter 3) suggests that the social changes examined in Chapters 5 to 8
would not have happened - or would not have happened in the same ways or
to nearly the same extent - in the absence of growing transplanetary connec¬
tivity. Thus a combination of theory, data, perceptions, and counterfactual
thinking provides ample grounds for affirming that globalization has
mattered as a force of social change.

The chapters in Part II focus on structural developments and structural
forces, with the result that agency may seem to play less of a role in shaping
the contemporary globalizing world. However, in accordance with the



158 Change and Continuity


structuration approach described in Chapter 1, the analysis in this book
assumes that all of the structural trends covered in the following chapters
have occurred through actor decisions. After the more structural orientation
of Part II, the importance of policy choice for the course of globalization is
reemphasized in Part III.



Chapter 5

Globalization and Production:
From Capitalism to
Hypercapitalism

Main points of this chapter
Expanded commodification
Altered organization
Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• intense globalization of the past half-century has substantially strength¬
ened the position of capitalism as the prevailing world structure of
production

• the growth of transplanetary social spaces has helped to increase surplus
accumulation in areas such as primary production and heavy industry,
while in addition facilitating the extension of commodification to
consumer, finance, information, communications, genetic, atomic and
care sectors

• the expansion of transworld links has encouraged significant shifts in the
organization of capitalism, including the rise of offshore centres, global
companies, corporate mergers and acquisitions, and oligopoly


The preceding chapter indicated that the capitalist mode of production has
figured centrally in the generation of globality in modern history. The present
chapter now considers the reverse direction of influence: namely, what the
rapid growth of transworld spaces in recent decades has meant for the way
that production is ordered. Has globalization entailed any changes to the
prevailing economic framework? How, if at all, has increased transplanetary
connectivity altered the forms that capitalism takes and the ways that surplus
accumulation happens? Has globalization, as a major respatialization of
social life, on the whole bolstered or undermined capitalism? Does the more
global world of the early twenty-first century show harbingers of a postcapi¬
talist order?

As mentioned in Chapter 1, a few authors have associated contemporary


159





160 Change and Continuity


globalization with a retreat of capitalism. Yet if capitalism is conceived as a
structure of production dominated by processes of surplus accumulation,
then it seems difficult to confirm such propositions. After all, as earlier chap¬
ters have noted, globalization has involved the creation of thousands of
transworld companies and strategic alliances, as well as the appearance of
innumerable global products, as well as huge expansions of transplanetary
money and financial flows, as well as the development of major additional
sectors of accumulation in the information, communications and biotechno¬
logy industries. None of these developments points to a decline of capitalism,
let alone its end. On the contrary, the trends sooner indicate that contempor¬
ary globalization has helped capitalism to become more widespread and
more entrenched than ever. If anything, globalization has contributed to the
advent of ‘hypercapitalism’.

This is by no means to affirm that the rise of transplanetary and suprater-
ritorial social relations has left capitalism unaffected. Although the overall
structure of capitalism would seem as robust as ever, globalization has helped
to alter the manner in which accumulation occurs. These shifts relate, on the
one hand, to the scope of commodification and, on the other hand, to the
organizational circumstances of accumulation.

In respect of commodification, globalization has not only reinforced older
arenas of accumulation such as primary production and heavy industry, but
also promoted the growth of other sectors such as consumer capital, finance
capital, information capital, communications capital, and most recently also
genetic capital (through biotechnology), atomic capital (through nanotech¬
nology), and care capital (through the ‘maid trade’ and the like). Aided by
globalization, then, more production than ever has acquired a capitalist logic.
These points are elaborated in the first part of this chapter.

With regard to the organization of capitalism, globalization has furthered
much-enhanced accumulation through offshore centres and transworld
companies. In addition, the growth of transplanetary spaces has encouraged
an unprecedented wave of corporate mergers and acquisitions, which in turn
has contributed substantially to an increased concentration of capital in
current history. These organizational aspects are covered in the second part
of the chapter.

In short, although globalization has not transformed the primary structure
of production - that is, taking society from capitalism to some postcapitalist
circumstance - this respatialization has stimulated important developments
within capitalism. Together, the expansion of commodification and the
greater organizational efficiency of accumulation have created a situation
that can suitably be termed ‘hypercapitalist’. This larger and faster accumu¬
lation has, as ever with capitalism, raised normatively and politically charged
questions of inequality and fair distribution, points that are examined at
length in Chapter 10.



Globalization and Production 161


Expanded commodification

Following a Marxian conceptualization, ‘commodities’ are the objects
through whose production and exchange surplus is created, extracted and
amassed. Hence a resource becomes ‘commodified’ when it is incorporated
into capitalist accumulation processes. For example, timber becomes
commodified when foresters move from subsistence use to market sale of
wood products for profit. A song becomes commodified when it is no longer
just sung among friends, but recorded and sold through the music industry.
Biological material like a plant variety becomes commodified when it is
patented for commercial exploitation. One of the key features of capitalism
therefore relates to the kinds of objects that function as commodities.
Likewise, the range of resources that become commodified provides a broad
indicator of the scope and intensity of capitalism in a given social context.

The character of commodities (in the specific Marxian sense just
described) has shifted throughout the history of capitalism. The following
sentences perhaps present an overly neat periodization, but the general point
holds that, over the past centuries, a continually widening spectrum of
economic activity has turned capitalist. Early surplus accumulation chiefly
involved commercial capital: that is, profit was acquired mainly through
trade in agricultural and mining output as well as in certain luxury goods like
furs and spices. From the late eighteenth century onwards, commercial capi¬
tal was joined by industrial capital: that is, the range of commodified articles
expanded to include manufactures from large-scale factory production.
Subsequently, mainly from the late nineteenth century onwards, commercial
and industrial capital were joined by finance capital: that is, financial instru¬
ments like stocks and bonds were also increasingly commodified. Trade in
these ‘articles’ became a means of accumulation in its own right, and the
financial assets became to some degree divorced from ‘real’ assets.

Accelerated globalization since the middle of the twentieth century has
helped further to expand commodification through a combination of six
developments. First, global markets have increased the scale of older forms of
commodification in primary and industrial goods. Second, consumerism -
much of it related to global products - has considerably extended the range of
industrial capital. Whereas manufacturing previously concentrated on bulk
textiles, steel, chemicals, armaments and so on, it has over the past century
increasingly also encompassed a plethora of branded articles that are destined
for immediate personal consumption. Third, the growth of supraterritorial
connectivity has greatly expanded finance capital beyond its far more modest
scope of a hundred years ago. Global banking, securities, derivatives and
insurance markets have hugely increased both the volume and the variety of
financial instruments that serve not only to facilitate other kinds of produc¬
tion, but also as channels of accumulation in themselves. Fourth, globalization



162 Change and Continuity


has encouraged a spread of commodification into new areas involving
information and communications. As a result, items such as computer soft¬
ware and telephone calls have also become means to achieve surplus accu¬
mulation. Fifth, global companies and global markets have promoted the
emergence of biotechnology and nanotechnology industries. Sixth, global
migration has contributed to increased commodification of care work.


Primary and industrial capital

Emphasis on the rise of new forms of commodification in recent history can
easily distract attention from the persistence and indeed growth, on a planet¬
ary scale, of older arenas of capitalist production. As noted in Chapter 1,
some contemporary social commentators have spoken of de-industrialization
and the dawn of ‘postindustrial’ society. By these arguments, efforts at
surplus accumulation are being redirected away from agriculture, mining and
heavy industry to the ‘information economy’ of a ‘network society’.

It may be true that primary and industrial production have declined as a
proportion of capitalist activity. The share of agriculture and manufacturing
in measured world output dropped from 38.8 per cent in 1960 to 25.8 per cent
in 1990 (ILO, 1995: 27). However, a relative reduction is of course not the
same as an absolute decrease. On the contrary, the period of intensified glob¬
alization has seen continued large-scale world growth of capitalist farming,
forestry, fisheries and mining, as well as the manufacture of steel, chemicals,
armaments, and so on. Agricultural products have figured prominently in the
globalization of markets, especially in the hands of transworld agribusiness
enterprises. Mining output remains the key export to global markets for coun¬
tries like Russia (oil and gas) and Zambia (copper). Construction companies,
in some cases like ABB and Bechtel Group operating as transworld organiza¬
tions, have undertaken countless infrastructure projects to build the roads,
ports, electricity grids, and power plants that underpin today’s more global
economy. Some localized de-industrialization has occurred as certain older
factory centres have become rust belts; however, new manufacturing sites,
including across parts of the South, have more than compensated for these
declines to yield an overall rise in world industrial production.

Hence the new economy of global capitalism retains much of the old. It has
not been a case of abandoning earlier arenas of commodification in favour of
fresh fields of accumulation. Rather, older sectors have survived and grown
at the same time that new sectors have burgeoned.

Consumer capital

One of the principal greatly expanded newer areas of commodification has been
consumer capital. ‘Consumerism’ describes behaviour where people frenetically



Globalization and Production 163


acquire (and usually fairly quickly discard) a variety of goods that provide the
user with some kind of instant but ephemeral gratification (cf. Featherstone,
1991; Sklair, 1995). This consumption centres on the satisfaction of transient
desires, especially cravings for novelty, entertainment, fantasy, fashion and
pleasure. Consumerism rejoices in excess - or indeed denies any such thing.
‘Consumer capital’ refers here to surplus accumulation that is realized in the
context of this hedonistic consumption.

Although consumerism has antecedents prior to the mid-twentieth
century, its main expansion has occurred since then. Today consumer capi¬
talism involves an enormous range of articles, including brand-name foods
and beverages, designer clothing, (purported) health aids, motorcars, licit
and illicit recreational drugs, tourism, dates arranged through commercial
agencies, photographs, audio-visual productions, and mass spectacles like
lotteries and sporting fixtures. In all of these cases, the consumer purchases an
instant (and usually temporary) pleasurable experience. Indeed, many people
have also taken consumerist expectations to settings such as education and
health care where immediate gratification is often not available.
Nevertheless, many contemporary universities and hospitals, too, have been
reoriented towards achieving ‘customer satisfaction’.

Consumerism involves the generation as much as the satisfaction of desire.
People must be induced to purchase articles and experiences that they would
otherwise consider unnecessary. Hence design and presentation have become
major preoccupations in contemporary markets. As of 2000, the world pack¬
aging industry produced 1.4 billion tonnes of materials (70 per cent of them
used for consumer goods) at a value of 443 billion euros through around
100,000 companies (FT, 18 May 2000: V). Likewise, a clever branding strat¬
egy can turn the mundane into the exceptional. To this end advertising has,
especially during recent decades, become a crucial adjunct to much capitalist
enterprise. Expanding at rates well ahead of GDP growth, world expenditure
on product promotion burgeoned from $39 billion in 1950 to $299 billion in
1997 (Paehlke, 2003:83).

A core ritual of consumerism is ‘shopping’. Over the past half-century this
performance has become routine activity for hundreds of millions of people.
With seeming inexorability, shop-opening hours have increased in most
corners of the world, sometimes against objections from traditional religious
quarters. Indeed, for many residents of the contemporary world, Descartes
could with only minimal exaggeration be repackaged to read: ‘Je shoppe done
je suis.’ Department stores and glittering arcades appear as temples, demand¬
ing at least a weekly visit, or more by the especially devout.

Another quintessentially consumerist activity is tourism (Urry, 2002).
Desires to experience ‘unique’ and ‘exotic’ places have burgeoned since the
1960s. In contrast to self-organizing travellers of earlier generations, tourists
of the present day purchase a packaged and branded product with largely



164 Change and Continuity


prearranged and staged presentations of the would-be extraordinary. In 2004
travel and tourism generated $5.5 trillion in annual expenditure (10.4 per
cent of world GDP) and involved some 214 million jobs, or 8.1 per cent of the
world’s waged workforce (WTTC, 2005).

Consumerism has pervaded all corners of the contemporary world,
although it has tended to affect city dwellers, middle classes and youth rela¬
tively more than other social circles. Moreover, this sphere of capitalism has
on the whole been more concentrated in the North than the South and the
East. However, by the 1990s consumerism had also become prominent in
urban centres of East and South East Asia, Eastern Europe and Latin
America. Even a postage stamp issued in 1992 by purportedly ‘communist’
Vietnam unabashedly depicted a clearly marked Suzuki motorcycle draped in
the insignia of Pepsi-Cola. After 1991 the government of India’s New
Economic Policy opened the country to consumerist icons like Pizza Hut and
Kellogg’s. Meanwhile Coca-Cola, expelled from India in 1977, has returned
to the country since the 1990s on a larger scale than ever.

The significance of consumerism in contemporary capitalism is evident in
the strength (both demonstrated and potential) of the consumer movement, a
form of citizen activism that was scarcely known 50 years ago. Founded in
1960, Consumers International, the self-proclaimed ‘global voice for
consumers’, now has over 250 member organizations in 115 countries (Cl,
2005). Whereas capitalists of an earlier era worried about workers with¬
drawing their labour, today many business executives sooner worry about
consumers withholding their purchases, as witnessed for example in boycotts
of Nestle and Nike. Over the past decade companies have turned increasingly
to so-called ‘corporate social responsibility’ (CSR) schemes in good part to
head off such consumer campaigns.

Consumerism has been intimately interconnected with globalization in
three general ways. First, most of the principal consumerist articles have been
transworld products. For example, British American Tobacco sold 900
billion cigarettes per year in 180 countries as of 2000 (Maguire, 2000). Over
a billion Barbie dolls were sold in 150 countries in the 40 years after this toy
first came to market in 1959 (Volkskrant, 29 April 2002:6). Goods like Sony,
Lego, Armani and Microsoft have thrived as global brand icons (Klein,
2000). Shopping malls - and airport duty-free zones foremost among them -
are in large part celebrations of supraterritorial offerings. Transworld
production chains have also furthered consumerism insofar as much of the
output of these global processes has consisted of packaged brand-name arti¬
cles.

Second, many objects of consumerist desire have lain in the technologies
that lie at the heart of contemporary intensified globalization. Needless to
say, mass tourism could not have developed on so large a scale without air
travel. Meanwhile global communications technologies like electronic mass



Globalization and Production 165


media have ranked among the chief suppliers of consumerist fad and fantasy,
for example, with television programmes and countdowns of pop music hits.

Third, global contexts have often played an important role in generating
the hedonistic desires on which consumerism thrives. Advertising has largely
operated through supraterritorial mass media like radio, television, and
transworld magazines. More recently cable television, call centres and online
e-commerce have opened new and distanceless ways of shopping. A global
event such as the Olympic Games has become as much a ‘Gathering of the
Brands’ as a ‘Gathering of the Nations’ (FT, 22 July 1996:21). On other occa¬
sions, globality has itself served as a marketing ploy, for example, when an
advertisement for Coca-Cola stresses how people all over the planet crave the
drink.

The preceding remarks are not meant to imply that globalization has been
a prerequisite for, let alone the sole cause of, the spread of consumer capital¬
ism. However, global products, transplanetary markets, and transworld
communications have greatly facilitated this expansion and intensification of
commodification. In these ways globalization has made consumerism a far
stronger force in the twenty-first century than it would otherwise have been.

Moreover, consumerism has provided a boon for surplus accumulation.
On the one hand, branding and packaging have allowed suppliers heavily to
mark up prices, thereby generating higher rates of profit. In addition, the
ephemeral character of consumerist fashions and pleasures has ensured that
most of the products in question have a relatively short use life. Thus, when
their incomes allow it, consumers quickly return to market for a new video,
pack of cigarettes, automobile, paperback novel, holiday, music recording, or
other pleasure article.

Thanks both to marked-up prices (yielding higher returns) and to rela¬
tively short product lives (generating higher frequencies of purchase),
consumerism has figured centrally in the survival and growth of contempor¬
ary industrial capitalism. Indeed, leading lights of consumerism have ranked
prominently among the world’s largest companies. A 1996 list of the top 100
corporations by market capitalization (that is, total share value) contained
over 20 suppliers of consumerist items. Their number included Coca-Cola,
Philip Morris, Nestle, Walt Disney, McDonald’s, Gillette, 7-Eleven, Sony,
and five automobile manufacturers ( WSJ, 26 September 1996: R27).


Finance capital

Finance is ‘commodified’ when dealings in foreign exchange, securities,
derivatives and the like are employed not only to assist capitalist production
in other sectors like agriculture and manufacture, but also as a means of accu¬
mulation in their own right. For instance, currencies might be bought and
resold in the hope of realizing profit (through commissions and exchange rate



166 Change and Continuity


fluctuations) as well as - or indeed instead of - to enable cross-border
commerce. Likewise, investors may trade securities to gain profit from shifts
in the prices of stocks and bonds rather than from payments of dividends and
coupons. Financial derivatives, too, have since the 1980s often become only
loosely connected to tangible resources. The derivatives then turn into objects
of investment in themselves as much as (if not more than) tools of risk
management. Insurance policies are bulk traded as objects of accumulation in
their own right through a secondary reinsurance market. In all of the cases
just mentioned, financial instruments come to have only partial - and perhaps
only negligible - relation to other objects of value. The trade in financial
instruments becomes a fairly self-contained circuit of accumulation.

The large-scale globalization of finance in current history has greatly stim¬
ulated the commodification of financial instruments. As recognized in
pioneering analyses of the phenomenon by Rudolf Hilferding (1910),
Vladimir Ilich Lenin (1917) and Karl Polanyi (1944), early instances of
finance capital appeared in the late nineteenth century. However, the
commodification of finance has become hugely more significant within
contemporary capitalism. In the past 50 years the variety of financial instru¬
ments, the number of financial markets in the world, the magnitude of invest¬
ments in financial instruments, and the volumes of financial trading have all
skyrocketed well beyond any previous level. Much of this enormous expan¬
sion of financial activity has come through electronic, supraterritorial trans¬
actions that move instantly across the planet.

Many indicators point towards an increased commodification of financial
instruments. For example, the proportion of foreign exchange dealings that
relate to transactions in ‘real’ goods fell from 90 per cent in the early 1970s to
around 2 per cent in the late 1990s. In the 1970s the value of transworld
movements of portfolio capital was roughly equal to that of global flows of
foreign direct investment, but by the 1990s these financial transfers had
become three times as large as FDI (FT, 30 September 1994: XII). Although
the following two figures are not directly comparable, it remains striking that
the annual turnover on world financial markets in the mid-1990s topped
$1,000 trillion, while world GDP was less than $30 trillion. In other words,
the value of around ten days of transactions on world financial markets had
come to approximate the value of annual world production of goods and
services. Such figures imply that financial dealings have developed a capital¬
ist logic that goes well beyond the so-called ‘real’ economy.

The contemporary proliferation of types of financial instruments also
suggests a deeper commodification of finance. In the bond and money
markets, for example, the traditional straight bond has been joined by float¬
ing-rate bonds, bonds with equity warrants, zero-coupon bonds, commercial
paper, repurchase agreements, asset-backed securities and so on. Similarly,
new forms of financial derivatives have appeared constantly in recent years.



Globalization and Production 167


By the mid-1990s Euroclear handled about 90,000 different kinds of securi¬
ties, with projected further increases to over half a million (FT, 19 June 1997:
20). Many of today’s retail banks have become financial supermarkets, offer¬
ing a dizzying array of saving and borrowing instruments as well as various
brokerage services.

Contemporary finance capitalism has also involved new kinds of institu¬
tional investors, including unit trusts, mutual funds, pension funds, and
insurance companies. For example, the number of US-based mutual funds
grew from 100 in 1951 to over 8,000 in 2003 (ICI, 2004: ii, 13). The total
invested in these funds topped $1 trillion in 1990 and $3 trillion in 1996,
before reaching $8.1 trillion at the end of 2004 (FT, 27 March 1996: 29; ICI,
2005). Meanwhile the value of world pension fund assets amounted to $13
trillion in 2000 (The Economist, 20 May 2000: 127).

Concurrently, financial trading centres have multiplied throughout the
world. In the 1990s new stock exchanges opened in 70 countries across
Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union (Harris, 1998-9:
23). Securities exchanges have appeared in places such as Malawi and Burma
where such an institution would have seemed very unlikely only a decade
before. Most derivatives exchanges have been created since the early 1980s,
in cities such as Kuala Lumpur and Sao Paulo as well as major financial
centres in the OECD countries.

Meanwhile turnover in the financial sector has burgeoned at market sites
old and new. As mentioned in Chapter 3, foreign exchange dealing reached
well over a trillion dollars per day by the mid-1990s and nearly two trillion
per day in 2004. The level of secondary trading in bonds likewise has risen to
many trillions of dollars’ worth per annum. The average value of dealing on
the world’s five most active stock exchanges (Hong Kong, London, New
York, Singapore and Tokyo) totalled more than $1 trillion daily in 1995 (FT,
28 March 1996: II). Average turnover on the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) grew more than tenfold in the last quarter of the twentieth century.
Whereas 30 million shares traded was a record day for the NYSE in the mid-
1970s, in the mid-1990s this figure regularly topped 450 million shares.
Derivatives dealings have skyrocketed as the value of outstanding exchange-
traded contracts rose from $0.7 trillion in 1987 to $14.3 trillion in 2000
(IMF, 2001: 22-3). Outstanding over-the-counter derivative contracts added
a further $197 trillion to this global market as of 2003 (BIS, 2004: 1).

Increased turnover in financial markets has on the whole brought
increased accumulation. For instance, foreign exchange business has since the
1970s provided banks with a major source of revenue. In one especially large
‘killing’, forex traders made £3 billion from the Bank of England’s attempts
in 1992 to stabilize sterling within the EU exchange rate mechanism of that
day. George Soros alone acquired $ 1 billion betting against the pound on this
occasion. Large swings in the Argentine peso, the Brazilian real, the



168 Change and Continuity


Indonesian rupiah, the Korean won, the Russian rouble, the Thai baht and
the Turkish lira have also given currency speculators field days in the past
decade.

More generally, too, bank dealings - and those of transworld banking
corporations prominently among them - have been a principal conduit of
surplus accumulation during the period of accelerated globalization. True,
banks have faced a number of crises. For example, looming defaults on
massive commercial loans to the South suppressed profits across much of
global banking in the mid-1980s. Likewise, property bubbles have burst in
several countries at considerable cost to the banking sector. Nevertheless, on
the whole profits for global banks have remained high and secure. Banks
constituted the single largest group (18 in number) among the 100 largest
world companies by market capitalization in the mid-1990s (FT500, 1997:
6-7). Banking was also the biggest sector among the largest 500 corporations
in 2004, with 66 companies holding a collective stock market value of $2.6
trillion (Pretzlik, 2004).

Steep rises in stock market indexes through the 1980s and 1990s likewise
indicated a large growth in stores of surplus as a result of the heightened
commodification of financial instruments. In London, for instance, the FTSE-
100 Index rose from a level of 1,000 at its launch in 1984 to more than 7,000
in 2000. In New York the venerable Dow Jones Industrial Index not only
finally broke the 1,000 level in early 1980s, but proceeded to exceed the
10,000 mark in 1999. In all, world stock market capitalization more than
tripled in a decade: from $6.5 trillion in 1986 to $20.2 trillion in 1997 (IFC,
1996: 17; UGI, 1999: 3). Investments on equity markets in the USA alone
totalled $17 trillion in early 2001, before the subsequent slump.

Figures for profits from trade in financial derivatives are not generally
publicized. However, the eagerness with which traders and institutions have
developed this business implies that it has provided handsome returns. In any
case large sums must have flowed into the coffers in order that the firms
involved could pay dealers and managers salaries of often astronomical
proportions. Meanwhile insurance (including reinsurance) ranked as the
sixth largest sector in terms of world stock market capitalization in 2004
(Bolger, 2004).

In sum, then, finance capital has generated many windfall profits in the
present time of transworld trading. A large proportion of contemporary
market transactions have been undertaken in a spirit of short-term specula¬
tion rather than for long-term investment. In consequence, as detailed in
Chapter 9, global finance capital has often been hugely volatile, placing
participants on permanent alert and subjecting them to recurrent panics.

Like any casino, global finance has yielded major losses as well as big wins.
For example, next to his massive gains Soros also lost $800 million on one
day in 1987 and $600 million on another in 1994. World bond markets



Globalization and Production 169


crashed in February 1994. A lone dealer in government bonds, Toshihide
Iguchi of Daiwa Bank, accumulated losses of $1.1 billion until he was
exposed in 1995. In equity markets, meanwhile, the Dow Jones Index has on
several occasions since 1987 plummeted over 300 points in a single trading
day. The 2001-2 slump in US stock markets at one point wiped $8 trillion off
of capitalization (Miller et ai, 2004). The FTSE-100 Index only slowly recov¬
ered to 5,000 points after its parallel plunge. Long after the bubble burst on
the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Nikkei 225 Index has yet to come anywhere
close to the level of 37,000 that it reached in 1989.

Securities exchanges in the so-called ‘emerging markets’ have tended to be
even more volatile. For example, the devaluation crisis of the Mexican peso
in December 1994 triggered massive sell-offs throughout Latin American
stock markets in the first half of 1995. Likewise, a large-scale withdrawal of
global capital from the Bangkok market in mid-1997 provoked similar
investor stampedes across much of East and South East Asia. Further such
crises have subsequently afflicted Russia, Brazil, Argentina and Turkey.

Global derivatives markets, too, have produced a succession of spectacu¬
lar losses. In 1994 a trading subsidiary of MetallGesellschaft lost an esti¬
mated $1 billion on oil derivatives. At the end of the same year Orange
County, California, went bankrupt after losing almost $1.7 billion in the
derivatives market. The rogue trader Nick Leeson brought down the vener¬
able house of Barings with losses of $1.3 billion in February 1995. In another
spectacular case, a copper futures dealer at Sumitomo Corporation, Yasuo
Hamanaka, built up losses of $2.6 billion in the decade to June 1996. A hedge
fund specializing in equity derivatives, Long Term Capital Management
(LTCM), was saved from collapse in September 1998 with a $3.6 billion
rescue package. True, these figures become less astounding when they are
considered as a proportion of overall amounts of contract trading, and so far
no other major hedge fund crisis has occurred since LTCM. Nevertheless,
such scenarios have reinforced fears that the speed and volume of transac¬
tions through transworld electronic channels could produce a domino effect
in the derivatives market, whereby the bankruptcy of one participant could
generate a systemic collapse.

Thus far, however, the global financial casino has found stability in its
instability. Even taking major slumps and crises into account, on the whole
finance capital has yielded investors many more gains than losses, and the
structure of capitalism has emerged as the clear overall winner. With little
exaggeration it can be concluded that the contemporary growth of global
finance has given surplus accumulation one of its greatest boosts in history.

The justice or otherwise of the ways that these gains have been distributed
is a different question, of course. As elaborated in Part III, only a minority of
the world’s population has held bank accounts and securities, and many poor
people and poor countries have suffered from limited access to credit and/or



170 Change and Continuity


crippling financial debts. Understandably, then, anti-poverty groups and
development NGOs have reserved some of their sharpest critiques for global
finance.


Information and communications capital

In addition to primary, industrial, consumer and finance capital, globaliza¬
tion has also created conditions for major growth in information and
communication capital. Like financial instruments, data, messages, ideas and
images circulate with particular ease in transplanetary, supraterritorial
spaces by means of electronic networks. Information technology (IT),
telecommunications, and mass media have thereby become primary sites of
surplus accumulation in recent decades.

As noted earlier, other commentators have discussed the growth of these
new industries with concepts like ‘postindustrial society’, ‘the information
society’, ‘the information age’, ‘the services economy’, ‘the network econ¬
omy’, ‘the knowledge revolution’, and so on. Yet these accounts have tended
to downplay or ignore the capitalist character of the contemporary produc¬
tion of information and communications. So-called ‘postindustrial society’ (if
one can speak of such a thing) has been even more steeped in capitalism than
was its ‘industrial’ predecessor. In this light references to ‘reflexive accumu¬
lation’ and ‘cybernetic’, ‘digital’, ‘electronic’, ‘high technology’ and ‘virtual’
capitalism better capture the nature of these developments (Robins and
Webster, 1988; Dyer-Witheford, 1999; Schiller, 1999; Paehlke, 2003;
Peterson, 2003).

Contemporary production of information and communications has
extended the reach of commodification in four major respects: hardware,
software, servicing and content. Hardware refers to the operating equipment
through which information and communications are processed. The produc¬
tion of telephones, computers, satellites, television sets and the like has
entailed a major expansion of factory-centred industrial capital since the
middle of the twentieth century. Companies, governments, educational
establishments, and households have spent huge sums to enhance their data
processing capacities. World sales of PCs topped 80 million units in 1996,
while receipts from the provision of semiconductors reached $50 billion in
1989 and $155 billion in 1995 (FT, 9 January 1996: 21; 26 September 1996:
5). Annual world revenues from telecommunications equipment have also far
exceeded $100 billion. In many countries, investment in information and
communications infrastructure has come to exceed investment in agriculture
and ‘smokestack industries’ (Sweezy and Magdoff, 1985). One oft-quoted
business analyst has estimated that a third of investment in the North since
the 1960s has gone into equipment to handle data and information (Drucker,
1993: 75). Reflecting this shift, the share of office and telecommunications



Globalization and Production 171


equipment in cross-border trade grew from 5 per cent in the early 1980s to 12
per cent in 1995, when it surpassed the value of agricultural exports (FT, 28
March 1996: 3).

Much surplus accumulation in contemporary history has also been
pursued through the production of software, that is, the thousands of digital
programmes that process information and communications through the
hardware. Interestingly, the inventor of the World Wide Web, Tim Berners-
Lee, forwent patent rights in 1991, so making this major software innovation
freely available for public use. However, this exception shows the rule that
computer programmes have been significant money spinners. Already in the
mid-1990s, programmes to effect Internet communications alone generated
sales of $2 billion per annum (FT, 9 April 1996: 15). Commercial software
producers have included corporate giants such as Microsoft and Cisco
Systems as well as hundreds of smaller suppliers.

Servicing of the hardware and software just described has also grown to
become a large and profitable industry. Computer technology in particular
has required major support. In this field specialized IT consultancy compan¬
ies like Electronic Data Services (EDS) and Integris have deployed tens of
thousands of employees across the world and generated multiple billions of
dollars in annual revenue.

Finally, information and communications industries have widened the
scope of capitalism with large-scale commodification of the content that
passes through electronic processing systems. In other words, the conveyance
of data, ideas, messages and images through supraterritorial spaces has
become a highly profitable business. Telephone calls, databases, mailing lists,
Internet connections, television broadcasts, DVD releases, news services,
market surveys, and the like have presented enormous new opportunities for
accumulation. Telephone companies, online service providers, cable and
satellite television suppliers, polling agencies and so on all levy subscriptions
and/or other user charges in the pursuit of profit. In this way information and
communications have become important to capitalism not only as infrastruc¬
ture to facilitate other processes of accumulation, but also as major objects of
accumulation themselves (cf. Mosco, 1988). Indeed, some critics fear that
information which is not amenable to commercial exploitation through digi¬
tization is becoming increasingly scarce. In the words of Spike Peterson,
‘what does not conform to the informational codes and economy does not
count’ (2003:137).

Globalization has lain at the heart of this commodification of information
and communications. For one thing, the technologies in question are largely
those of supraterritorial communications. In addition, transworld organiza¬
tions have generated much of the increased demand for commodified inform¬
ation and communications. The operations of global companies, global civil
society associations and global governance bodies have been thoroughly



172 Change and Continuity


dependent on telecommunications networks and computerized data trans¬
fers. Meanwhile publishers, broadcasters, filmmakers and Internet service
providers have flourished with transworld customer bases.

Initially the contemporary increased commodification of information was
an unqualified boon for accumulation. A study by the American Federation
of Information Processing Societies estimated that revenues of the computer
sector in the USA quadrupled in real terms during the 1980s (Schiller and
Schiller, 1988: 149). Hardware providers like Intel, IBM and Hewlett
Packard shot up the ranks to join the world’s largest corporations. Shares in
IT firms rose in the 1980s and 1990s to rank among the high earners on
equity markets. IT stock launches and mergers and acquisitions between IT
companies provided investment banks with some of their most lucrative busi¬
ness.

Yet, much as other new technologies in the past, information industries
have subsequently had a bumpy ride in capitalist markets. Like the railways
sector in the nineteenth century, the initial IT boom was followed by large-
scale bust. The PC gold rush likewise receded in the mid-1990s, as even former
market leaders Apple Macintosh and Olivetti struggled. The Internet bubble
burst with many investor casualties in 2000-1, particularly on the Nasdaq
market. Nevertheless, overall the IT sector has blessed capitalism, and high
profits on software have placed industry leaders like Marc Andreessen,
Michael Dell and Bill Gates among the world’s wealthiest individuals.

Telecommunications, too, have generated great accumulation in
contemporary history. In terms of market capitalization the value of this
sector across the planet quadrupled between 1986 and 1995, to over $600
billion (FT, 12 February 1996: 24). Annual turnover on telecoms equip¬
ment and services exceeded $600 billion in 1996 (WSJ-E, 17 February
1997: 2). Both fixed-line and mobile telephone providers enjoyed large
profits in the 1990s, although a slump in the market capitalization of
several leading mobile telecoms companies in 2001 temporarily dampened
some of the capitalist exuberance in that industry. Lucrative capitalist
potential helps to explain the flood of - and urgency behind - privatizations
of telephone services around the world since the mid-1980s. Sixty-one tele¬
coms privatizations occurred between 1990 and 1996, and several dozen
more sell-offs followed in the late 1990s (EST, 1997: 5). In only one coun¬
try anywhere in the world, Uruguay, has the privatization of the service
been explicitly rejected. Concurrently, the WTO has given considerable
priority to liberalizing the telecoms sector in cross-border commerce. As
one commentator has summarized, ‘deregulation and technological change
are transforming the phone industry from a sleepy utility business into a
high-growth competitive free-for-all’ (Kuhn, 1995: 48). For example, over
80 new telecommunications companies were established in the Asia-Pacific
region between 1990 and 1997 (EST, 1997: 6).



Globalization and Production 173


Other large-scale accumulation has occurred in the context of globaliza¬
tion through mass media corporations. Sales of the world’s 50 largest
multimedia businesses reached $110 billion in 1993, while the value of
cross-border trade in printed materials, music, visual arts, cinema and asso¬
ciated equipment nearly tripled from $67 billion in 1980 to $200 billion in
1991 (HDR, 1999: 33). Global media empires such as Time Warner Inc.,
Walt Disney Company, Bertelsmann AG, Viacom, and News Corporation
have loomed large on the contemporary capitalist landscape (Herman and
McChesney, 1997; McChesney, 1997; Williams, 2001). The largest player
in the sector, Time Warner Inc., generated revenues of $40 billion in 2003
(Time Warner, 2004: 12). Media tycoons like Rupert Murdoch and Silvio
Berlusconi have ranked among the most colourful entrepreneurs in
contemporary capitalism. True, flamboyance has not always enhanced the
bottom line. Nevertheless, capitalist ambitions have continued to fuel the
growth of the media sector, whose value in Europe more than doubled
during the first half of the 1990s (FT, 17 June 1996: 26). Indeed, in the mid-
1990s broadcast media and publishing were the two most profitable indus¬
tries in Europe (FT500, 1997: 17). In the USA, almost a fifth of the 400
richest persons as of 1989 obtained their wealth from the mass media
(Petras, 1993: 141).

Spurred largely by globalization, then, information and communications
industries have moved to the core of capitalism for the twenty-first century.
Expecting that this trend will proceed further, global investment bankers like
Merrill Lynch and Salomon Brothers have maintained large telecommunica¬
tions, media and IT divisions. In the light of such developments, Peter
Drucker has conceded that his purported ‘postcapitalist society’ may in fact
be an economy dominated by information capitalism (1993:166-7).


Genetic and atomic capital

The seemingly ever-widening range of commodification under globalizing
capitalism can be further seen in emergent sectors of biotechnology and
nanotechnology. At the moment these new arenas of accumulation remain
relatively small next to well-established primary, industrial, consumer,
finance, information and communications capital. However, genetic and
atomic capital have the potential to figure large in future global accumula¬
tion.

Biotechnology - an integration of biochemistry, microbiology and engi¬
neering - involves the mapping and manipulation of the elementary building
blocks oflife. Originating in the discovery of DNA in 1953, and mainly devel¬
oped since the 1970s, advanced genetic engineering has applications in a host
of sectors, including agriculture (e.g., GM crops), chemicals (e.g., plastics),
energy (e.g., biofuels), forestry (e.g., pulp and paper), medicine (e.g., cell and



174 Change and Continuity


tissue culture), military (e.g., biological weapons), and pharmaceuticals (e.g.,
hormones and insulin). Champions expect that biotechnology can greatly
advance struggles against disease, poverty and ecological degradation, while
critics warn that the emergent field opens the way to clones, designer babies,
and new diseases with unpredictable consequences for human and other life
(Rifkin, 1998; Ruse and Castle, 2002).

One undoubted consequence of biotechnology is its extension of capitalist
activity. Although much of this work remains experimental at the present
time, the research has often been undertaken through life science companies
backed by venture capital. Some of the resultant new products have already
gone to market, for example, CM crops in the USA since 1996. As of 2001
over 3,000 biotech companies in the USA and Europe between them gener¬
ated over $32 billion in revenue (McKelvey et al., 2004). This figure seems
likely to rise many times over in the years to come.

Nanotechnology is even earlier in development than biotechnology. Nano
production covers processes whereby materials are constructed at the level of
atoms and molecules. Whereas traditional manufacturing technologies have
involved the assembly of large visible parts, and biotechnology has involved
constructing items on a microscopic level, nanotechnology operates at an
even smaller scale. One nanometre (nm) is one-billionth of a metre, or
approximately ten atoms of hydrogen in width. Nanotechnology permits the
manufacture of metals, tissues, etc. on an atom-by-atom or molecule-by-
molecule basis (Wood et al., 2003; Mehta, 2006).

At the moment nanotechnology remains even more experimental than
biotechnology. Total world revenue for all nano-scale products was only
$7.6 billion in 2003 (ETC, 2004: 4). Wider economic applications - with
larger and as-yet little studied social impacts - will probably not appear for
several decades. However, if the science is successfully developed, it holds
enormous potentials for additional accumulation. Like mechanization and
digitization before it, the ‘atomically modified’ outputs of nanotechnology
could revolutionize the production of foods, medicines, metals, textiles,
weaponry, and more. Patents on these innovations could generate huge prof¬
its and reinforce capitalism still further in the middle of the twenty-first
century and beyond.

Globalization has fostered the emergence of both biotechnology and
nanotechnology in a number of ways. For one thing, transplanetary networks
have enabled a critical mass of widely dispersed specialist scientists to under¬
take accelerated research and development of these two areas. In addition,
each of these new spheres of accumulation has looked to a global pool of
finance to acquire the large amounts of requisite venture capital and to a
transworld scale of market to recoup investments and maximize earnings.
Several global companies like Du Pont, Eli Lilly, Monsanto and Syngenta
have been leaders in the commercial exploitation of biotechnology. These



Globalization and Production 175


and other transworld corporate players have begun to take on the market
application of nanotechnology as well. Global governance has figured import¬
antly in both new sectors, inter alia by enshrining the intellectual property
rights that provide much of the legal framework for profit making from these
technologies.


Care capital

Finally, globalization has contributed to an expansion of commodification
through the growth of what might be termed ‘care capital’. The care sector
encompasses services to promote the well-being of persons who cannot
perform such activities themselves, such as disabled, elderly, ill and young
people (Yeates, 2004: 371). It also includes the provision of emotional and
material supports to intimates.

Traditionally care work has not been commodified. Childrearing, home¬
making, healing, listening, and sexual relations have generally not been objects
of commercial transactions. True, small circles of wealthier households have
long included waged domestic servants. In addition, many modern medical
professionals have received pay for their therapies, and prostitutes have for
centuries supplied remunerated sexual labour. However, most day-to-day
care work (predominantly supplied by women) has not been monetized.

Of course care labour has been indispensable to the workings of capitalism
as a whole (Mies, 1998; Peterson, 2003: ch 4). For example, the nurturing
and socialization of children has been vital to the provision of the next gener¬
ation of capitalist investors and workers. Likewise, unpaid material, affective
and sensual sustenance in the ‘private’ sphere of the household has under¬
pinned other commodified labour in the ‘public’ arena of the waged work¬
place. Moreover, unremunerated homemakers (again, overwhelmingly
women) have provided a major client base for much consumer capitalism.
However, in the past care has generally buttressed accumulation in other
sectors rather than itself being a site of direct and deliberate accumulation.
Indeed, to this day household work is invisible production in an informal
economy that does not figure in conventional macroeconomic statistics.

Yet under emergent hypercapitalism the provision of care too has become
increasingly commodified. This trend is evident, particularly in the North,
with the growth of commercial health services, childcare provision, nursing
homes for the elderly, housecleaning agencies, professional counselling and
other psychological therapies, marriage and adoption bureaux, surrogate
mothering, and an expanded (and often legalized) sex industry with erotic
dance clubs and the like as well as prostitution. In many cases hired care
labour within the household has also promoted increased female wage labour
in the ‘public’ sphere, whether in lowly paid clerical and retail jobs or in high-
earning professional careers.



176 Change and Continuity


Although globalization has not been essential to the commodification of
care, transplanetary connections have facilitated this trend in important
respects. A few medical services (particularly for expatriate professionals
working in major cities in the South) have operated as global companies.
Some marriage and adoption services have drawn brides and children from
all corners of the earth. The expanded sex industry has often been linked to
global tourism when the client travels to the provider and global (usually
illicit) migration when the sex worker is brought to the client. Transworld
migration from the South to the North has also supplied a substantial propor¬
tion of the lowly paid and poorly protected (usually female) domestics that
underpin highly lucrative care capital (Heyzer et al., 1994; Anderson, 2000;
Wichterich, 2000; Parrenas, 2001; Ehrenreich and Hochschild, 2002).
Several authors have discerned ‘global care chains’ in which migrant domes¬
tics both service care needs in the North and, through remittances, sustain
family in the South (Hochschild, 2000; Yeates, 2004).


Summary

Taking the above remarks concerning commodification in sum, globalization
has played an important role in widening the range of capitalism and reori¬
enting the relative weights of accumulation away from ‘merchandise’
(commercial and industrial capital) toward ‘intangibles’ (finance, informa¬
tion, communications, genetic and nano capital). To this extent the ‘real’
economy has acquired a different ‘reality’.

As emphasized earlier, this is not to claim that primary and older industrial
commodities have become insignificant in contemporary capitalism.
However, they do not dominate accumulation in a more global economy as
they once did in territorialist capitalism. Among the world’s largest 100 firms
by market capitalization in 1995, a full three-fifths concentrated on
consumer, finance and/or information industries. Chemicals and oil compan¬
ies still carry weight, but other sectors that were prominent in the territorial¬
ist world of the late nineteenth century (e.g., mining, iron and steel, and
railways) barely figure in the top corporate ranks today (FT500, 1996: 2).
Only one of the top ten sectors in Europe in terms of shareholder returns over
the period 1996-2001 came from older heavy industries (namely, oil and
gas). All nine others involved consumer, finance, information and communi¬
cations sectors (FT, 29 June 2001: II).

It would seem telling in this light that, in general, countries where produc¬
tion has continued to focus predominantly on extractive activities and old
industrial plant have become relatively poorer in the contemporary globaliz¬
ing world. This is arguably one reason for the widened North-South gap
since 1960, especially with respect to the poorest countries. Likewise, the
collapse of state socialism in Eastern Europe and the former USSR might be



Globalization and Production 177


attributed in part to the failure of central planning in those countries
adequately to generate consumer, finance, information, and communications
sectors. The Soviet bloc could make a running in the mid-twentieth century,
when primary and industrial capital were dominant, but the regimes failed to
meet the challenges of emergent hypercapitalism in the globalizing economy
of the late twentieth century.


Altered organization

Apart from shifts in respect of commodification, another general area where
globalization has promoted changes in the operations of capitalism is the orga¬
nizational conditions of accumulation. Two developments in this regard - the
growth of offshore centres and the proliferation of transworld companies -
have been mentioned earlier while discussing the definition, history and expla¬
nation of globalization. At the present juncture, however, the concern is to
assess the consequences of these developments in global organization for
surplus accumulation. In addition, two further trends in respect of capitalist
organization are newly introduced below, namely, increased merger and
acquisition (M&amp;A) activity and a greater concentration of capital in many
sectors. Like the expansion of commodification, these organizational shifts
have on the whole enhanced the possibilities of surplus accumulation. In these
respects, too, globalization has thus far been a bonanza for (hyper jcapitalism.


Offshore centres

As intimated in Chapters 3 and 4, the offshore phenomenon has provided a
major fillip to surplus accumulation. Offshore centres generally offer nil or
minimal rates of corporate, sales, and personal taxes. These sites also entice
capital with low input costs, limited regulation, subsidies, and statutory guar¬
antees of confidentiality. Euphemisms affirm that offshore arrangements
provide ‘tax efficiency’ and ‘discretion’. To put the matter more explicitly,
offshore arrangements have created much enhanced opportunities for
accumulation.

As indicated earlier, states have created offshore zones mainly for global
production processes and for global financial activities. In addition, offshore
registration has offered so-called ‘flags of convenience’ for shipping vessels
and leased aircraft. The Internet has opened further possibilities of offshore
dealings in respect of gambling, telecommunications and e-commerce (Palan,
1998: 625). Inasmuch as duty-free shopping occurs in special areas that
escape normal taxation arrangements, it could also be considered an offshore
activity.

Many of these sites of special taxation and regulation are islands like the



178 Change and Continuity


Bahamas or Bahrain that literally lie ‘offshore’. Yet in countries like
Bangladesh and Romania, EPZs are located ‘onshore’ in or near coastal
areas. Meanwhile certain so-called ‘offshore’ centres such as Liechtenstein
and Luxembourg are in fact landlocked. In this respect the term ‘offshore’ is
somewhat of a misnomer.

It should be noted as well that offshore arrangements have not been a
preserve of small states alone. Several major states have also passed the rele¬
vant legislation. Lor example, in the 1980s both Britain and China launched
special economic zones for manufacturing. Offshore financial facilities were
introduced in New York in 1981, in Tokyo in 1986, and in Bangkok in 1993.

Since so much of the relevant data (particularly in relation to offshore
finance) is not publicly available, it is difficult to calculate with any precision
the repercussions of these arrangements for contemporary capitalism.
However, it would not seem far-fetched to suggest that offshore legislation
has in recent decades channelled more than a trillion extra dollars’ worth of
accumulation to corporations and private individuals.

The offshore phenomenon has arguably also benefited accumulation for
companies and wealthy persons in indirect ways. Lor example, many govern¬
ments have arguably lowered upper tax bands and loosened restrictive regu¬
lations on economic activity partly in order to discourage capital flight to
offshore zones. In addition, many trade unions have probably moderated
their demands in respect of wages and other working conditions for fear of
otherwise encouraging enterprises to relocate plants in EPZs (and other low-
wage areas).


Global companies

As noted in earlier chapters, thousands of firms have in the context of global¬
ization given their organization a substantial transworld dimension, either by
establishing affiliates in multiple countries across the planet or by forging
strategic alliances with enterprises based in several regions. Some of these
global corporate organizations are huge. Lor example, as of 2004 the
Unilever company encompassed more than 500 subsidiaries in around 100
countries, and the mass media conglomerate Bertelsmann AG covered more
than 600 affiliates in 50 countries. In the realm of strategic alliances, the
WorldPartners Association, formed in 1993, has linked 19 telecommunica¬
tions carriers in operations across over 35 countries. The advertising firms
LCB and Publicis have since 1988 developed collaboration between their
several hundred offices in over 70 countries.

Global companies have acquired a very prominent place in contemporary
capitalism. Lor example, the collective annual sales of the 50 largest unitary
global enterprises rose from $540 billion in 1975 to $2,100 billion in 1990,
equivalent to around 10 per cent of recorded world product (Carnoy et al.,



Globalization and Production 179


1993: 49). Yearly sales by all foreign affiliates of transborder firms
increased from $2.7 trillion in 1982 to $17.6 trillion in 2003, equivalent to
almost half the value of world GDP (UNCTAD, 2004: 9). By 1990 the
largest 350 global companies between them conducted almost 40 per cent of
the world’s cross-border trade, and the largest 500 companies collectively
accounted for over half (Rugman and Verbeke, 1990: 1; Lang and Hines,
1993:34).

Although ‘going global’ has not opened a capitalist paradise to all firms,
on the whole the fruits of transplanetary mobility and coordination have
figured very positively in company profit margins. Global corporations have
often sited their production and markets at the commercially most advanta¬
geous locations, wherever on earth those places might be. Moreover, even
when plant and equipment remain fixed at certain locations, transworld
companies have (as mentioned in Chapter 4) also increased their earnings
through global accounting formulas. With transfer pricing, for instance, a
firm can set prices on its intra-firm cross-border trade at such levels that prof¬
its flow to the balance sheets of those subsidiaries that are sited in countries
with the most advantageous tax, auditing or other regulatory conditions.
Sometimes, then, the tricks of global accounting have been as important to
corporate accumulation as transplanetary production and marketing.

A number of rough indicators suggest that global organization has served
the purpose of surplus accumulation very well. For instance, the annual prof¬
its of the largest transplanetary enterprises have exceeded the GDPs of many
smaller countries. Other studies have shown that, among US-based firms at
least, the bigger transworld corporations have tended to generate higher
returns than intra-country firms, particularly since 1980. Some analysts have
in this regard discerned a two-tiered stock market, with a clear contrast
between global and national companies (Kuhn, 1995:46,48). By no means is
it clear that, as some Marxists have suggested, the contemporary prolifera¬
tion and growth of global corporations has been necessary to the survival of
capitalism. Nevertheless, globalization of the firm has certainly - for the time
being at least - yielded plentiful capitalist returns.

‘Alliance capitalism’, too, has generally had positive implications for accum¬
ulation (Dunning, 1997). True, some of these initiatives have yielded disap¬
pointing results. Indeed, certain studies have suggested that over 40 per cent
of parties to strategic alliances have not regarded their partnerships as
successful (Gilroy, 1993:137). Yet even on this pessimistic assessment more
than half of early strategic alliances bore fruit. Moreover, the proportion of
profitable strategic alliances would seem likely to grow as firms acquire more
experience with this mode of organization. Already many strategic alliances
have allowed companies to pool resources, achieve economies of scale, share
risk, and shape markets to their joint advantage. For example, cross-licensing
agreements between global pharmaceutical companies have generated very



180 Change and Continuity


high profits in that sector (Gilroy, 1993: 152). Indeed, in some cases ‘strate¬
gic alliance’ appears to be a euphemism for ‘cartel’.


Mergers and acquisitions

In a third general organizational trend of contemporary capitalism that is
substantially connected with globalization, many companies have gone
beyond strategic alliances to full-scale fusions through mergers and acquisi¬
tions. In the words of one investment banker, ‘As companies go global, more
acquisitions result’ (Fortune, 1995: 40). Indeed, with ‘conquests’ by ‘corpor¬
ate raiders’ and many ‘hostile takeovers’, M&amp;A activity among firms has
acquired a vocabulary of (supraterritorial) warfare once reserved for (territo¬
rial) states.

Since the 1980s capitalism has seen successive flurries of M&amp;A (Kang and
Sakai, 2000). The annual world total of these transactions more than doubled
from 11,300 in 1990 to 24,600 in 1997 (HDR, 1999: 32). The aggregate
value of M&amp;A deals rose to unprecedented levels of $1.1 trillion in 1996,
$1.5 trillion in 1997 and nearly $2.1 trillion in 1998 (WSJ-E, 2 January 1998:
R9; FT, 29 January 1999: I). Fusions across state borders numbered 2,141
with a total value of $67.3 billion in 1993, then skyrocketed to a peak of $1.1
trillion in 2000, and subsequently declined year on year to 4,500 deals with a
total value of $297 billion in 2003 (Went, J 1996: 13; UNCTAD, 2001: 52;
UNCTAD, 2004: 6).

The rise of transplanetary relations has not constituted the sole force
behind ‘merger mania’ and ‘takeover fever’; however, the growth of global
economic activity has spurred the trend in several respects. For example,
cross-border M&amp;A has given many companies a means of quick entry into a
target country. Rather than needing to build up an affiliate from scratch, the
global company can purchase a going concern and in the process also
dispense with a competitor. Governments have generally been loath to hinder
such acquisitions, partly for fear of alienating globally mobile capital that
might otherwise locate in another jurisdiction.

Globalization has also encouraged much M&amp;A activity within countries.
Many ‘domestic’ fusions have had the specific aim to create a larger national
firm that can hold its own in globalizing capitalism. In short, corporate
combination has been a strategy for company survival in the face of global
competition. On these occasions, too, governments have been reluctant to
hamper M&amp;A, for fear of prompting relocation and/or of undermining the
position of ‘their’ firms in global markets.

Increased transplanetary connectivity has also stimulated burgeoning
M&amp;A activity insofar as the deals have been especially prevalent in areas of
production that lie at the heart of globalization. For example, a number of
aircraft manufacturers have merged with an eye to global positioning. In this



Globalization and Production 181


spirit Lockheed acquired Martin Marietta in 1994, while Boeing merged with
McDonnell Douglas in 1997. In consumer industries, corporate acquisitions
have made major global players still larger in cases like Nestle, Philip Morris,
RJR Nabisco and Unilever. The pharmaceuticals sector witnessed some $80
billion of M&amp;A business in the mid-1990s, including 16 deals of $1 billion or
more (FT, 7 March 1996: 21). Several principal transworld hotel chains
(Hilton, Sheraton, etc.) have also expanded by the M&amp;A route.

In finance, various mergers between commercial banks have created veri¬
table global giants like Tokyo-Mitsubishi Bank, Chase Manhattan (incorpor¬
ating Chemical Bank) and HSBC (incorporating Midland Bank). Multiple
other bank mergers and takeovers occurred within and between EU countries
in anticipation of their economic and monetary union. Most Canada-based
banks have been involved in mergers, largely so that these institutions might
survive in global financial markets.

A number of global banks have since the 1980s also taken over global
securities houses, thereby ending the traditional separation of commercial
and investment banks. Prime examples of these combinations include Credit
Suisse First Boston, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell and ING Barings. In addition,
numerous banks have acquired insurance companies (or vice versa) to
become so-called ‘bancassurance’ combinations. In the largest such transac¬
tion to date, Travelers Group took over Citicorp in 1998 in a deal worth $73
billion. Among themselves, too, insurance firms have undergone dozens of
fusions largely in order to enhance their global market position.

As for the information and communications sectors, IT enterprises experi¬
enced 2,913 mergers and acquisitions in 1995 alone (FT, 29 January 1996:
22). Dozens of major telecommunications companies have likewise under¬
taken M&amp;A to create veritable transworld carriers. For instance, Telefonica
de Espana, newly privatized and the largest global company based in Spain,
has bought into businesses in 18 countries. Various global media firms have
also fused since the late 1980s, including Sony with CBS and Time Life with
Warner Brothers (with further expansions in 1996 to acquire Turner
Broadcasting and in 2000 to merge with America Online).

True, the 1990s also witnessed some important demergers, especially in
respect of multi-business conglomerates. For example, IBM disaggregated
into 14 smaller and potentially mutually competitive companies in 1991.
Sandoz hived off its industrial chemicals division as a new company in 1995,
before fusing with Ciba-Geigy in 1996 to form the pharmaceuticals giant
Novartis. AT&amp;T, Hanson, ICI, and ITT have also embarked on demerger
initiatives.

However, the list of breakups is relatively short next to the concurrent
plethora of mergers and acquisitions. Moreover, ‘spinning off’ appears to
have been a temporary fashion, mainly circulating in the boardrooms of UK-
and US-based companies, along with a few other firms headquartered in



182 Change and Continuity


France and Germany. No headline demergers have occurred since 2000. The
overall trend in present times of accelerated globalization has pointed deci¬
dedly towards increased combinations.

Mergers and acquisitions are not by themselves guarantees of profitability
in globalizing markets, of course. Indeed, many fusions have failed in terms
of subsequent share price performance, earnings growth, turnover of top
executives, new product development, etc. Time Warner failed to report a
profit for many years after the 1989 merger and struggled again after acquir¬
ing other businesses a decade later. The costs of major takeovers are also
astronomical (although they bring high earnings to the investment banks that
coordinate them). Nevertheless, even if the returns have sometimes fallen
below expectations, global market opportunities and competition have
propelled a major trend to fuse companies.


Concentration

Due largely to expanded M&amp;A activity, globalizing capitalism has brought
substantially increased concentration to many areas of production. Often the
fusions have involved not a bolt-on acquisition of a small firm by a sector leader,
but a ‘mega-merger’ of giants that radically transforms the competitive balance
in a market. The peak year of 2000 saw 175 cross-border mergers involving
assets of over $1 billion each (UNCTAD, 2004: 6). As a result, globalizing capi¬
tal has, thus far, on the whole meant bigger and more centralized capital.

A handful of big firms now dominate many sectors. For example, in the
mid-1990s the largest five companies in the respective areas of production
accounted for 70 per cent of world markets in consumer durables, 60 per cent
of air travel, over half of aircraft manufacture, over half of electronics and
electrical equipment, over 40 per cent of global media, a third of chemicals,
and some 30 per cent of world insurance sales (Harvey, 1995: 194). In 1998
the ten biggest firms in the respective world markets controlled almost 70 per
cent of computer sales, 85 per cent of pesticides, and 86 per cent of telecom¬
munications (HDR, 1999: 67). Likewise, ten companies have come to control
two-thirds of the world semiconductor industry (Lang and Hines, 1993:
35-6). Meanwhile business in the issuance and secondary trading of debt
instruments has become more and more concentrated in a small group of
investment houses (ISMA, 1995:10). By 1998, just three firms between them
handled over 75 per cent of the value of worldwide M&amp;A deals (FT, 29
January 1999:1). In cross-border trade, as of the early 1990s, five companies
accounted for 77 per cent of cereal shipments, and four companies covered 87
per cent of tobacco shipments. Meanwhile the top three companies in their
respective sectors effected 80 per cent of the banana trade, 83 per cent of the
cocoa trade, and 85 per cent of the tea trade (Madden, 1992: 46). Global
chains owned almost a third of the world’s hotel rooms in 1993, up from a



Globalization and Production 183


quarter in 1989 (FT, 31 January 1997: 15). A few companies such as
Associated Press, Reuters and Agence France Presse have dominated global
news provision. Visa, MasterCard and American Express between them
process 95 per cent of the world’s credit card business (FT, 12 June 1996: 1).
As of 1995, the five giants of the music industry controlled more than two-
thirds of the $40 billion world market in recordings (FT, 2 September 1996:
21; 27 September 1996: X). Following several major mergers and acquisi¬
tions, the big four of accountancy firms (Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Ernst &amp;
Young, KPMG, PricewaterhouseCoopers) dominate across six continents.

In these circumstances, the largest 100 global companies (0.2 per cent of
the total number) have controlled 12 per cent of total world FDI and 14 per
cent of world sales by foreign affiliates (UNCTAD, 2004: xvii). The top 300
global firms have held anywhere between a quarter and a third of all corpor¬
ate assets (Dunning, 1993: 15; Harvey, 1995: 189). The 15 largest global
companies have each reached annual sales turnovers whose value exceeds the
GDP of over 120 countries (Went, 1996: 18).

To be sure, some developments have gone against the prevailing trend
towards concentration. Indeed, new technologies and new methods of
management have encouraged a growth of small firms in some sectors,
including computer software, Internet service providers and biotechnology.
That said, these small companies have often conducted most of their transac¬
tions with large global concerns. To that extent their autonomy has been
severely restricted.

Overall, the past half-century of intense globalization has yielded condi¬
tions of considerable oligopoly in the world economy. Indeed, many corporate
leaders have assumed that only the largest companies in a sector can profit in
a global market. The much-discussed ‘pressures of global competition’ have
made governments and citizens more ready to allow ‘their’ corporate flag
carriers to acquire an oligopolistic position. Meanwhile no global anti-trust or
competition authorities have emerged to monitor and if necessary check this
concentration, a point for future policy that is discussed in Chapter 12.


Conclusion

The analysis in this chapter (see the summary box) suggests that significant
trends in capitalism have been not only a major cause, but also a chief conse¬
quence of globalization. Taking these developments in sum, it is clear that the
growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial spaces has to date helped to
widen the range of surplus accumulation and deepen the hold of capitalism in
contemporary society. Alternative modes of production have arguably never
been as weak in the world economy. In this light theses concerning ‘late capi¬
talism’ and ‘postcapitalism’ seem decidedly misplaced.



184 Change and Continuity


Implications of globalization for production in
summary

Expanded capitalist commodification

• continued growth of primary and industrial capital

• rise of consumer capital

• exponential expansion of finance capital

• development of information and communications capital

• emergence of genetic and atomic capital

• growth of care capital

Reorganization of surplus accumulation

• creation of profit-enhancing offshore arrangements

• proliferation of transworld corporate networks

• large waves of company mergers and acquisitions

• rise of global oligopolies


As elaborated in Chapter 9, the reinvigoration of capitalism through the
growth of globality has been accompanied by considerable volatility and
periodic crises. In addition, as specified in Chapter 10, the move from capi¬
talism to hypercapitalism has exacerbated a number of inequalities between
classes, countries, genders and races, as well as between urban and rural
areas. Moreover, as seen in Chapter 11, so far the contemporary growth of
transworld capitalism has tended to reduce democratic controls on economic
policy. Yet these negative developments do little to suggest a decline of capi¬
talism as a structure of production. Surplus accumulation has continued
robustly, however unstable and unjust the circumstances may have been for
many individuals, firms and governments. Hence for the time being analysis
should concentrate not on risks that globalization might pose to the survival
of capitalism, but on harms that globalizing processes of surplus accumula¬
tion can do, particularly to vulnerable social circles.




Chapter 6

Globalization and Governance:
From Statism to Polycentrism

Main points of this chapter
The obsolescence of statism
The reconstructed state
Multi-scalar public governance
Privatized governance
(Global) civil society
Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• contemporary large-scale and accelerated globalization has rendered the
statist mode of governance non-viable and encouraged the emergence
of polycentric (multi-sited and networked) regulation

• states remain crucial nodes in this polycentric governance, although
globalization has spurred several important shifts in their attributes

• globalization has opened considerable possibilities for substate (munici¬
pal and provincial) authorities to engage directly with realms beyond
their state

• inadequacies of the state as a sole site for governance of global relations
have promoted a growth of suprastate (macro-regional and transworld)
sites of regulation

• dominant neoliberalist policy frameworks in contemporary globalization
have encouraged a major expansion of private sites of governance

• civil society activity has followed the trend from statism to polycentrism by
shifting its focus from the state alone to a multi-scalar diffuse governance
apparatus


Alongside, and often in close relation with, shifts in the social structure of
production, contemporary globalization - and the rise of supraterritoriality
more particularly - has also encouraged a number of changes in the organi¬
zation of governance in the contemporary world. Territorialism as the previ¬
ously prevailing framework of social space was closely interlinked with
statism as the previously prevailing mode of regulation. Hence a move away


185




186 Change and Continuity


from territorialism in geography has, not surprisingly, unfolded together
with a move away from statism in governance. As a result, society in today’s
more global world is regulated in what can be termed a polycentric manner.

‘Statism’ refers here to a condition where societal governance is more or
less equivalent to the regulatory operations of territorial bureaucratic
national governments. In statist circumstances, all formulation, implementa¬
tion, monitoring and enforcement of societal rules occurs more or less
directly through the state and inter-state relations. Under statist governance,
macro-regional and global regulatory mechanisms are small in scale, if
present at all, and fall more or less completely under the thumb of country
governments. Likewise, in a statist mode of governance local governments
have no significant autonomy from central governments regarding national
policy questions. Moreover, local authorities in a statist situation lack
substantial possibilities to engage directly with the wider world outside their
state. In short, as the term suggests, statism entails governance that is for all
intents and purposes reducible to the state.

Following - and spurred on by - half a century of accelerated globalization
and growing supraterritorial connections, statist conditions no longer mark
governance today. To be sure, country governments remain major and indis¬
pensable sites of regulation in the contemporary more global world. The end
of statism in no way entails the end of the state itself. However, governance
now also involves suprastate (regional and transworld) regimes that operate
with some autonomy from the state. In addition, many substate (municipal
and provincial) governments today engage directly with spheres beyond their
country.

In other words, governance in the more global world of the twenty-first
century has become distinctly multi-layered and trans-scalar. Regulation
occurs at - and through interconnections among - municipal, provincial,
national, macro-regional and global sites. No single ‘level’ reigns over the
others, as occurred with the primacy of the state over suprastate and substate
institutions in territorialist circumstances. Instead, governance tends to be
diffuse, emanating from multiple locales at once, with points and lines of
authority that are not always clear.

The dispersal of governance in contemporary history has occurred not
only across different layers and scales of social relations from the local to the
global, but also with the emergence of various regulatory mechanisms in
private quarters alongside those in the public sector. Many rules for global
companies, global finance, global communications, global ecology and other
global matters have been devised and administered through nongovernment¬
al arrangements. Although this private governance has generally depended
on support, or at least tolerance, from government agencies, it too has main¬
tained substantial autonomy from the state.

This situation of multi-scalar and diffuse governance might be called



Globalization and Governance 187


‘polycentrism’, to denote its distinctive feature of emanating from multiple
interconnected sites. Polycentrism is not the only possible name for this situ¬
ation, of course. For example, Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri have
invoked the term ‘empire’ to describe ‘a decentered and deterritorializing
apparatus of rule that progressively incorporates the entire global realm’
(Hardt and Negri, 2000: xii). John Keane has introduced the concept of
‘cosmocracy’ to denote a ‘much messier’ and ‘far more complex type of
polity’ with ‘multiplying, highly mobile and intersecting lines of government¬
al powers’ (Keane, 2003: 98). Other analysts have for their part referred to a
‘new medievalism’ to designate conditions where, as in the European Middle
Ages, multiple authorities operating on different scales exercise overlapping
and sometimes conflicting competences over the same realms (Bull, 1977:
254-5, 264-76; Anderson, 1996; Kobrin, 1998a; Friedrichs, 2001). Or one
can describe a ‘new multilateralism’ or a ‘plurilateralism’ involving both
states and non-state actors (Cerny, 1993; R.W. Cox, 1997; Schechter, 1999a,
b). Another alternative is to speak of ‘networked governance’ or ‘netocracy’,
where regulation occurs through webs of interconnected agencies (cf.
Rhodes, 1997; Reinicke, 1999-2000; Stone, 2004). James Rosenau has
talked of ‘mobius-web governance’ with intricate and overlapping dynamics
among multiple levels of regulatory authority (2003: 396-7).

Polycentrism seems the least problematic of these labels. ‘Empire’ has
existed in such diverse forms in so many historical contexts that the word
does not easily evoke something distinctive about governance in the present-
day more global world. The term ‘cosmocracy’ and the related ‘cosmopoli-
tics’ (Archibugi, 2003) could be read to imply: (a) that the larger, global scale
has primacy over other spheres, possibly with a tendency towards world
government; and (b) that the inhabitants of this polity have overriding
cosmopolitan impulses towards universal human solidarity and global citi¬
zenship. Yet neither of these conditions holds today. The notion of ‘new
medievalism’ is objectionable since, apart from superficial similarity in the
broadest outlines of the governance structure, there is very little of the
medieval in the twenty-first century. The phrase ‘networked governance’
captures important qualities of the contemporary poststatist mode of regula¬
tion, but this name perhaps tends to overplay the significance of the links rela¬
tive to the nodes, overemphasizing the connections between agencies relative
to the agencies themselves. In contrast, ‘polycentrism’ both captures the
multi-sited character of current governance and invites an exploration of the
interplay between sites.

The rest of this chapter further elaborates the shift from statism of an
earlier era to polycentrism as the prevailing mode of governance in the
twenty-first century. The first section below indicates how contemporary
large-scale globalization - and the rise of supraterritoriality more particularly
- have rendered statist regulation non-viable. The second section shows how



188 Change and Continuity


globalization has not undermined the state, but rather repositioned it in
certain important respects. The third section explains the recent growth of
multi-scalar public governance (with transborder relations between substate
authorities and a proliferation of macro-regional and global institutions) as
largely a response to inadequacies of the state as the sole site for governance
of global relations. The fourth section reviews the expansion of private regu¬
latory arrangements as a consequence of rapid contemporary globalization
and its prevailing neoliberalist policy orientation. The fifth and final section
notes that the shift from statism to polycentrism has prompted changes in the
object of civil society activity away from the state alone to a multi-scalar and
diffuse governance apparatus.


The obsolescence of statism

The statist mode of governance peaked between the mid-nineteenth to the
mid-twentieth century. At this point territorial bureaucratic centralized states
reigned supreme over the vast majority of humanity, including through state-
based colonial empires. Governance through local councils, religious orders
and market actors was everywhere superseded by or subordinated to regula¬
tion through the state. States supplied rules to govern pretty well every aspect
of social relations: money, language, armed violence, sexual behaviour,
employment, formal education, health standards, heritage, nature conser¬
vancy, etc.

World politics in this statist era was very much an international (or, to be
more precise, inter-state) system. Provincial and municipal authorities had no
significant transstate relations. Suprastate regionalism did not exist apart
from a few international river commissions. A few small and minimally
resourced international organizations showed but the faintest trappings of
global governance. The situation fell very much into what international rela¬
tions theorists have typically called a ‘Westphalian’ mould, after the 1648
Peace of Westphalia that formalized the modern concept of a system of sover¬
eign states.

Westphalian sovereignty held that each state would exercise supreme,
comprehensive, unqualified and exclusive rule over its territorial jurisdiction.
With supreme rule, the Westphalian sovereign state would answer to no other
authority; it always had the final say in respect of its territorial realm and its
cross-border relations with other countries. With comprehensive rule, the
Westphalian sovereign state governed all areas of social life. With unqualified
and absolute rule, Westphalian sovereign states respected a norm of non¬
intervention in one another’s territorial jurisdictions. With exclusive and
unilateral rule, the Westphalian sovereign state did not share governance over
its realm with any other party.



Globalization and Governance 189


Since the mid-twentieth century, accelerated globalization and the rise of
supraterritorial connectivity have made Westphalian constructions of state
sovereignty obsolete. Westphalian practices of sovereignty depended on a
territorialist geography where all social transactions occur at fixed locations:
either within territorial jurisdictions, or at designated points across tightly
patrolled territorial borders. However, supraterritorial circumstances cannot
be fixed in a territorial space over which a state might aim to exercise absolute
control. An era of large-scale globality does not allow a state - even the most
highly endowed state - to exercise supreme, comprehensive, unqualified and
exclusive rule over its territorial domain. Indeed, on many occasions trans¬
planetary relations influence circumstances in a country without ever directly
touching its soil.

Many material conditions in the current globalizing world have made
statist governance unviable. Computerized data transmissions, radio broad¬
casts, satellite remote sensing and telephone calls do not halt at customs
posts. Moreover, such communications occur: (a) at speeds that make it diffi¬
cult for state surveillance to detect them in advance; and (b) in quantities that
a state, even with greatly enhanced capacities, cannot comprehensively track.
Even a long-time arch-sceptic of globalization theses has conceded that
Internet use by transborder criminal networks presents states with major
challenges (Krasner, 2001). Electronic mass media have also detracted from
a state’s dominion over language construction and education. Nor can a state
exercise complete authority over transplanetary associations or global
companies. In addition, as detailed below, many regulations now come to the
state from suprastate bodies and global law rather than from that state itself.
Likewise, governments intervene in, rather than control, global trade. How
can the Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore possibly inspect the 18.5
million containers that crossed its wharves in 2003 (MPA, 2004)? With the
development of global currencies, credit cards and the like, even the most
powerful state has lost unqualified authority over money supplies and
exchange rates. Nor can a state successfully assert supreme and exclusive rule
over the global financial flows that pass through its jurisdiction (or do they?).
Electronic commerce, intra-firm trade, offshore financial centres, derivatives,
and hedge funds have all substantially compromised state abilities to raise tax
revenues (Tanzi, 2000). Transworld ecological developments such as ozone
depletion and biodiversity loss have similarly contradicted the material terri¬
torialist preconditions of statist governance.

Contemporary globalization and the rise of supraterritoriality have also
loosened crucial affective underpinnings of statism (in ways that are detailed in
Chapter 7). On the one hand, the new geography has advanced various nonter¬
ritorial identities and solidarities. Transworld bonds on lines such as class,
disability, gender, profession, race, religion and sexual orientation have
diluted, rivalled and sometimes also overridden feelings of national community



190 Change and Continuity


that have in the past so buttressed statist governance. At the same time,
contemporary globalization has also often reinvigorated more localized soli¬
darities. When faced with a seemingly vast, intangible and uncontrollable
globality, many people have turned away from the state to their local ‘home’
in hopes of enhancing their possibilities of community and self-determination
(Strassoldo, 1992). In addition, citizens and governors alike have in general
become increasingly ready to give values such as economic growth, human
rights and ecological integrity - none of which is strictly bound to territory -
a higher priority than loyalty to the state.

On both material and ideational counts, then, contemporary large-scale
globalization - and its supraterritorial aspects in particular - have contra¬
dicted and subverted the statist mode of governance. In this light various
authors have observed that the world has moved into ‘the twilight of sover¬
eignty’ or ‘beyond sovereignty’ (Soroos, 1986; Wriston, 1992). These
commentators have noted that ‘sovereignty is no longer sacrosanct’ or ‘has
lost much of its relevance’ (Chopra and Weiss, 1992; Lapidoth, 1992: 345).
The Westphalian notion of sovereignty has indeed become obsolescent
(Czempiel and Rosenau, 1989; Rosenau and Czempiel, 1992).

Other analysts have argued that sovereignty has not ended but rather
taken new form to fit poststatist conditions (cf. Williams, 1996; Clark, 1999:
ch 4; Cohen, 2001; Osiander, 2001; Krasner, 2003). These theorists rightly
emphasize that key ideas and practices like sovereignty are social constructs
that evolve as historical contexts change (Onuf, 1991; Biersteker and Weber,
1996; Sorensen, 1999). In this regard some commentators have spoken of
emergent ‘partial’ or ‘shrunken’ sovereignty, as states surrender their prerog¬
atives in certain areas. Other observers have introduced notions of ‘limited’,
‘qualified’ and ‘semi’ sovereignty, as states acquire numerous legal commit¬
ments to regional and global regimes. Or analysts have coined phrases
concerning ‘pooled’ and ‘shared’ sovereignty, in respect of various instances
like the EU where regulation is undertaken jointly among states. The head of
the WHO has promoted the idea of ‘enlightened sovereignty’, where states
cede control in areas subject to universally agreed norms and values
(Brundtland, 2000). Global environmental problems might elicit a ‘greening
of sovereignty’ (Litfin, 1998; also Schrijver, 1997). Still other scholars have
reconceptualized sovereignty to mean a state’s ‘capacity to manage’, thereby
removing inferences of unilateral, supreme and unconditional rule (cf.
Gelber, 1997: xi). Yet whether one abandons or refashions the concept of
sovereignty, it is clear that the statist conditions to which sovereignty referred
in the past are gone.

True, even in statist times practice sometimes fell short of the Westphalian
principle of sovereignty (Krasner, 1999; Teschke, 2003). For example, many
states at one time or another undertook military invasions and covert inter¬
ventions into foreign jurisdictions. Westphalian states also never enjoyed full



Globalization and Governance 191


control of cross-border movements of money (Helleiner, 1999). In addition,
colonial administrations sometimes exercised only limited control over
peripheral districts of their claimed territory. Meanwhile weaker states often
lacked the resources to make good their legal pretensions to absolute control
over their territorial jurisdiction. And a scattering of religious universalists,
liberal cosmopolitans and Marxist internationalists rejected the Westphalian
principle of sovereign statehood on moral grounds long before the onset of
contemporary intense globalization.

In spite of these earlier challenges, however, Westphalian sovereign state¬
hood remained hypothetically realizable in the territorialist world of old. A
state could, by strengthening its means, graduate from mere legal sovereignty
to approximate full substantive sovereignty. Major states could generally
make good their claims to supreme, comprehensive, unqualified and exclu¬
sive governance over a designated territorial space. Moreover, the principle
of sovereign statehood enjoyed largely unquestioned acceptance in
Westphalian times. The few cosmopolitans around were normally dismissed
as misguided Utopians.

Yet today, amidst large-scale globality (and widespread supraterritoriality
more particularly), statist constructions of sovereignty cannot be made oper¬
ative, whatever the resources that a country government has at its disposal.
Although a number of technological developments have greatly enhanced
capacities for state surveillance and intervention, these innovations have not
kept pace with rises in global mobility. For example, determined Internet
users can find ways to circumvent state-controlled firewalls and service
providers (as in China). No amount of unilateral state mobilization can halt
climate change at the border, or monitor all electronic financial transfers, or
locate every undocumented worker.

That said, states are anything but impotent in the face of contemporary
globalization. The end of Westphalian state sovereignty has not marked the
end of state power. On the contrary, as noted in Chapter 4, states have ranked
among the prime forces that have generated the major acceleration of global¬
ization in recent decades. Moreover, governments can shape the effects of
globalization on their territories and populations: with fiscal policies, mone¬
tary policies, consumer policies, labour policies, environmental policies, data
protection policies, and so on. Arguably many governments have not used
their full room for manoeuvre in respect of globalization (McQuaig, 1999).
Indeed, many politicians have sought to escape responsibility for their own
policy failures by blaming a purported juggernaut of globalization.

Stronger states in particular can substantially influence transplanetary
and supraterritorial activities and indeed exploit the new geography to
considerable advantage. For example, the US government has become a sole
‘superpower’ in good part thanks to its use of global rules and institutions,
global money, global finance and global military operations. Arguably major



192 Change and Continuity


states - such as those of the OECD and the Group of Seven (G7) - have in fact
gained new power as they have lost traditional sovereignty.

In contrast, weaker states have tended to lose relative power in the face of
expanded globality. Clearly, for example, the Japanese state has generally
been able to exert far more influence in global spaces than the Bolivian state.
The authorities in Burkina Faso or El Salvador have had very limited capaci¬
ties to manage global flows in regard to their respective countries, with but a
handful of relevant experts and hardly any of the necessary equipment and
data. Indeed, with cruel irony most new, postcolonial states (established in
the time of accelerated globalization and the major rise of supraterritoriality)
obtained Westphalian sovereignty in name at the very moment that the prin¬
ciple ceased to be realizable in practice.

But none of this has meant the end of the state. Although, as noted in
Chapter 1, a number of commentators have linked contemporary globaliza¬
tion to a retreat or even demise of the state, these death notices have been
recklessly premature. Yes, recent decades have witnessed several striking
implosions of government, for example, in Lebanon and Somalia. In addi¬
tion, several states like ex-Czechoslovakia, Eritrea/Ethiopia, the former
Soviet Union, and Yugoslavia have fragmented. Yet states threatened with
collapse have almost invariably survived, and recompositions of states have
been the stuff of world politics for centuries. None of these developments
point to the death of the state as such.

Thus, just as territoriality has remained important with the passing of
territorialism, so states have remained important with the passing of statism.
Whatever new world order might be emerging in the course of contemporary
globalization, the state remains a significant part of it (Weiss, 1998; Sorensen,
2004). There is no basis to assumptions that globality and the state are inher¬
ently contradictory. States remain prominent players in contemporary govern¬
ance and show no sign of disappearing in the foreseeable future.


The reconstructed state

Yet to conclude that the state persists - and persists prominently - in contem¬
porary times of large-scale accelerated globalization is not to conclude that
the state remains the same. As many a political theorist has stressed, the state
has never in its history been fixed. It is perpetually ‘in motion, evolving,
adapting, incorporating . . . always in some condition of transition’ (Jarvis
andPaolini, 1995:5-6).

The accelerated growth of transplanetary connectivity over the past half-
century has promoted several significant shifts in the character of the state.
One change, the end of sovereignty in its Westphalian incarnation, has
already been elaborated above. In addition, states have had to develop new



Globalization and Governance 193


capacities to address global matters such as ecological change, electronic
finance, human rights, and transworld production. Other features of post-
Westphalian statehood, discussed in further detail below, include: (a) reori¬
entations of states to serve global as well as national constituencies; (b)
adjustments to state provisions of social welfare; (c) altered features of
warfare; and (d) increased transstate connections in regulatory processes.

Turns towards global constituencies

Contemporary globalization has encouraged increased complexity in respect
of the constituencies that states serve. The territorialist state of old generally
represented so-called ‘domestic’ or ‘national’ interests. It sought to advance
the pursuits of its citizens in the wider world and to defend them against
harmful so-called ‘external’ or ‘foreign’ intrusions. To be sure, Westphalian
states often favoured the interests of certain sectors of their resident popula¬
tion more than others, for example, particular classes, religious denomina¬
tions or ethnic groups. However, such privileged constituencies almost
always lay within the given state’s territory and among its citizens.

Under the influence of contemporary globalization, states have become
less consistent in holding a territorial line of defence of their ‘inside’ against
their ‘outside’. States no longer always clearly promote ‘domestic’ interests
against those of ‘foreigners’. Instead, states in a more global world have
tended to become arenas of collaboration and competition between a
complex array of national and transnational players.

To take one prominent example, contemporary states have often served
the interests of global capital in addition to (and sometimes ahead of)
national capital. (Needless to say, global capital here includes not only
‘foreign’-based enterprises, but also ‘home’-based concerns with transworld
operations.) Much contemporary state policy has thereby addressed the
needs of global production chains, transplanetary financial markets,
supraterritorial mass media operations, transworld telecommunications
companies, and so on. Many governments have feared that, if they do not
provide sufficiently appealing and predictable taxation and regulation envir¬
onments, footloose global capital will desert them. For instance, in 1995
alone 65 states liberalized their rules governing foreign direct investment
(HDR, 1999: 29; see also UNCTAD, 2004). Likewise, many governments
have offered subsidies and reduced corporate tax rates in scarcely disguised
interstate tax competition for mobile global business (Tanzi, 1996). Offshore
privileges of the kind described in Chapter 5 are another symptom of the
tendency for contemporary states to serve global capital. In addition, some
states (or parts of states) have collaborated in the illicit business of global
criminal networks.

On the judicial side of government, various global actors have increasingly



194 Change and Continuity


used national courts, sometimes also in regard to situations outside the terri¬
torial jurisdiction of the state in question. For example, many transworld
companies have gone to US-based courts regarding alleged violations of
patent rights outside the USA. In another case, human rights groups sought to
indict former President Augusto Pinochet for abuses in Chile through the
Spanish courts. (For more on extraterritorial jurisdiction of state courts, see
Akehurst, 1972-3; Born, 1996; Lowenfeld, 2002.)

The above remarks are not meant to suggest that states have prostrated
themselves before transworld companies, with no attention for ‘internal’
business interests. On the contrary, many states have responded to contem¬
porary globalization with intensified commercial protectionism in respect of
certain ‘domestic’ sectors (agriculture, steel and textiles are prominent exam¬
ples). Indeed, the contemporary state has often been a site of struggle between
territorial and supraterritorial capital. For example, even the radically neolib-
eralist Thatcher Government prevaricated in the face of Nestle’s 1988
takeover of a ‘British’ institution, Rowntree Mackintosh. Likewise,
Vodafone’s proposed purchase of Mannesmann in 2000 initially sparked
nationalistic opposition in Germany, although the agitation quickly dissi¬
pated when it was realized that Mannesmann shares already lay largely in
non-German hands.

Post-Westphalian states have sometimes also sided with other types of
global constituents besides firms. For example, many governments in the
South have taken heed of the priorities of global economic institutions, found¬
ations and NGOs when designing and executing development policies. In
terms of social movements, the Iranian state after 1979 gave extensive
support to Islamicists across the planet. Other states have from time to time
carried the banner for global environmentalism or for a global human rights
campaign. For instance, in 1995 the Danish, German and Swedish govern¬
ments joined transworld protests by environmentalists against Royal
Dutch/Shell’s plan to sink the Brent Spar oil platform in the North Atlantic.
Likewise, many states backed global civil society campaigns against
apartheid rule in South Africa.

In short, with increased globalization the clientele of governments has
become increasingly global as well. National-territorial constituencies
remain very important, but raison d’etat has become more than raison de la
nation. A state’s attempts to serve both country-based and global interests
can breed ambiguous policy, particularly when the two constituencies
conflict.


Pressures on state welfarism

Greater state orientation towards global constituencies is a fairly indis¬
putable consequence of greater transplanetary connections in contemporary



Globalization and Governance 195


society. However, a second issue, the implications of greater globality for
state provision and regulation of social welfare, is far more debateable (cf.
Esping-Andersen, 1994; M. Rhodes, 1996; Bowles and Wagman, 1997;
Baker et al., 1998; Yeates, 1999, 2001; Alber and Standing, 2000; Swank,
2002; Sodersten, 2004). On the one hand, many analysts have argued that the
growth of transworld relations has put (or could be expected to put) consid¬
erable downward pressures on state guarantees of social protection (Teeple,
1995; Gray, 1998; Stryker, 1998; Mishra, 1999). On this line of argument,
the welfare state and progressive social reform would be the casualty of a
‘race to the bottom’ of government interventions in the market economy. In
contrast, other researchers have argued that states (especially stronger states
in the North) have far more discretion in their choices regarding social policy
in a globalizing world. Such governments can, if they so decide, sustain
considerable programmes of social welfare (Garrett, 1998; Rodrik, 1998;
Hirst and Thompson, 1999; Yeates, 2001; Clift, 2003).

The history of states during the half-century prior to the onset of acceler¬
ated globalization was in good part a case of growing public-sector guaran¬
tees of nutrition, health care, housing, education, minimum income and other
human welfare needs. At the same time, many states introduced regimes of
progressive taxation to effect a substantial redistribution of wealth among
their resident populations. Such programmes of state-centred social reform
unfolded (in different ways and to different extents) across the planet: North
and South, East and West. A number of circumstances encouraged this trend,
including the spread of universal suffrage in national politics, pressures from
organized labour, the global communist movement, and promises made by
governing elites to suffering masses during the world wars and decoloniza¬
tion struggles.

In contrast, the last decades of the twentieth century saw considerable
attenuation of state-supplied welfare guarantees and other measures for
progressive redistribution. ‘Transition economies’ in Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union experienced major declines in state provision of social
services and large increases of social inequalities. ‘Opening up’ the economy to
private market activity under surviving communist regimes in China and
Vietnam also went hand in hand with growing welfare gaps. Across the South,
postcolonial socialist projects gave way to ‘structural adjustment’ in the direc¬
tion of liberalized markets and less direct state provision and regulation of
welfare programmes (Rudra, 2002). Would-be social reformers like Museveni
in Uganda or Lula in Brazil have, once in state office, tempered or abandoned
programmes to increase state-supplied welfare and state-led redistribution. In
the North, Britain under Thatcher, the USA under Reagan, and New Zealand
under Lange pursued especially severe reversals of state guarantees of welfare
needs in the 1980s. In addition, Francois Mitterand, failed as President of
France in the early 1980s to resurrect policies of nationalization and



196 Change and Continuity


Keynesian demand stimulation. Even governments in Scandinavia, after
largely resisting pressures to retrench during the 1980s, scaled back their
public welfare measures in the 1990s (Geyer et al., 2000). Almost no govern¬
ment anywhere in the world of the early twenty-first century dares openly to
pursue a major programme of progressive redistribution of wealth to finance
expanded state guarantees of social welfare.

Instead, responsibilities for the provision of education, health care, hous¬
ing, pensions, and the like have tended to shift from the state to non-state
actors. There are exceptions, for instance, where statutory health insurance
has been substantially extended in Costa Rica, South Korea and Tunisia.
However, in many more countries citizens have been encouraged to supple¬
ment or supplant public health and pension programmes with private
commercial schemes. At the same time many states have contracted out much
delivery of social services to NGOs. In addition, families (and particularly
women) have often been expected to fill in welfare gaps left by the failures and
omissions of states (Dalla Costa and Dalla Costa, 1993).

This general retreat from state-led progressive social reform has unfolded
concurrently with major growth in transplanetary and supraterritorial rela¬
tions. Does this correlation imply that the two trends are causally connected?
Certainly some links can be discerned. As noted in earlier chapters, opportun¬
ities to escape the profit-constraining corporatist welfare state have
provided considerable impetus to the globalization of capital. In response,
many governments have told their citizens that cuts in higher rates of tax and
reductions of costly social protections are necessary steps to face ‘global
competition’.

Has globalization limited the state’s ability to raise tax revenues needed to
pay for more generous social guarantees? Opinion on this point is divided.
Some analysts have suggested that globalization has undermined the fiscal
capacities of states (McKenzie and Lee, 1991; Steinmo, 1994). Other studies
have argued that so-called ‘big government’ can be quite compatible with
globalization (Rodrik, 1998; Garrett, 2001) and that taxation of business
remains as viable as ever (Swank, 1998). Both sides in this debate have tended
to define globalization as liberalization, so that the argument concerns the
consequences of certain policies towards globalization rather than globality
(as transplanetary connectivity) per se. In this sense the implications of
greater transworld relations for state guarantees of welfare are perhaps more
a question of policy choice than the new geography as such. Needless to say,
stronger and wealthier states have far more scope to make such choices than
weaker and poorer states, so that globalization would sooner constrain
government fiscal positions in the South than in the North.

In any case it would be overly simplistic to attribute developments in
Northern welfare states entirely to globalization. Quite apart from
increased transplanetary relations, other demographic, economic and



Globalization and Governance 197


political conditions were already putting substantial strains on social
programmes in most OECD countries by the last quarter of the twentieth
century. Circumstances like ageing populations, altered family patterns,
transformations in labour markets, government budget deficits, increased
costs of health care, and the rise of neoliberalist ideology all presented chal¬
lenges to social welfare policies built up through Northern states during the
so-called ‘golden age’ of 1945-75. Hence, although pressures from globally
mobile capital for lower taxation and reduced regulatory constraints created
additional problems for Northern welfare states in the late twentieth century,
substantial difficulties existed anyhow.

Moreover, governments of the North have responded to pressures on the
welfare state in diverse ways and to varying extents. For example, strongly
neoliberalist regimes in Australia and the USA have retrenched more severely,
while more social democratic governments in Denmark and the Netherlands
have maintained comparatively high state-supplied social protections. In
other words, to understand the impact of globalization on a given welfare
state it is necessary to examine national particularities like electoral politics,
cultural traditions, and the relations between state, labour and business in a
given country (Esping-Anderson, 1996; M. Rhodes, 1996; Garrett, 1998;
Geyer, 1998; Yeates, 1999; Weiss, 2003).

In any case, cuts in state guarantees of social protections should not be
exaggerated, particularly in respect of the North. In fact, in EU countries
social expenditure as a percentage of GDP remained broadly steady during
the 1980s and 1990s, and at considerably higher levels than in the 1960s. In
some respects people in the North have sometimes perceived a decline of the
welfare state, when it may actually be their expectations of still greater public
provision of pensions, health care, education, housing and other social
services that have been disappointed.

Outside the North, too, there could be greater room for manoeuvre on
state welfare policies than is often imagined. It may transpire that, with time,
governments in ‘transition countries’ can improve their provisions of social
protection in a more global world. In the South, economic restructuring
programmes have increasingly incorporated so-called ‘social safety nets’
since the 1990s, with the aim of reducing the worst pains for poor and disad¬
vantaged people. Indeed, in 1999 the IMF and the World Bank changed the
label of what had until then been called ‘structural adjustment programmes’
to ‘poverty reduction strategies’. It is a matter of dispute how far the new
name has brought different substance with it, but the shift has at least given
explicit acknowledgement of a need for social policy delivered through states.

Finally, there are cases where globalization appears actually to have
promoted growth of state welfare programmes. For example, many govern¬
ments have expanded education and training budgets on the argument that
such spending will enhance their country’s competitive position in global



198 Change and Continuity


markets. In a more specific case, the Republic of Korea responded to pres¬
sures of globalization, including in particular the Asia financial crisis of the
late 1990s, with increases in state-supplied social protection (Lee, 1999:
34-7; Kwon, 2000).

In sum, then, globalization has had complex implications for state guar¬
antees of social welfare. Depending on the specific circumstances, growing
global relations can have the effect of contracting, reorienting, or expanding
state delivery of social protections. In any of these scenarios, however, glob¬
alization is but one of several relevant factors. Wider macroeconomic condi¬
tions, national institutions, and political choices also figure importantly in
determining the fate of state welfare programmes in a more global world.


Altered patterns of warfare

Next to welfare, contemporary globalization has also had implications for
warfare. Preparation for and engagement in organized armed violence was a
major spur to the early formation of Westphalian states and subsequently
also remained one of their chief preoccupations (Shaw, 1984; Mann, 1988;
Tilly, 1990). That said, the means and purposes of state war-making have
shifted over time. The large spread of global relations in recent decades has
encouraged several further such changes in relation to the post-Westphalian
state (Sorensen, 2004: ch 7).

For one thing, unprecedented levels of globality in contemporary history
have reduced some incentives for interstate warfare. With its focus on terri¬
torial conquest, war has limited utility for the capture of supraterritorial
resources. Armed operations by land, sea and air are not terribly effective
ways to gain control of the Internet, electronic finance, transworld produc¬
tion chains, global consumer markets, transplanetary ecological trends, or
global governance regimes. Of course, states may continue to pursue warfare
for territorially based objectives like securing access to natural resources or
overthrowing country governments, but conventional armies are poor tools
in relation to supraterritorial phenomena.

Indeed, interstate warfare arguably serves little purpose for governments
and social circles that have become deeply intertwined with one another
through global relations. States have little reason to embark on war against
each other - and on the contrary have every reason to avoid armed conflict -
when they host the same global companies, promote the same global curren¬
cies, support the same global elites, enjoy the same global entertainments,
collaborate in the same global governance regimes, and so on. In this light
Martin Shaw has suggested that the end of warfare between advanced indus¬
trial states reflects their transformation into a relatively coherent single
Western state conglomerate (Shaw, 2000). Thus perhaps it is no accident that
states with McDonald’s outlets in their jurisdictions have only once gone to



Globalization and Governance 199


war against each other. Even in the single exception to this rule, the Kosovo
War of 1999, the six McDonald’s restaurants in Belgrade only closed during
the hostilities between Serbian and NATO forces and quickly reopened after
the ceasefire (New York Times, 2 July 1999).

While the rise of global connectivity may in certain respects have discour¬
aged inter -state warfare, it has in other ways encouraged states to pursue
greater inward application of armed violence (Kaldor, 1999; Shaw, 2000;
Hironaka, 2004). All but three of the 61 major armed conflicts recorded
between 1989 and 1998 were civil wars (HDR, 1999: 5; Wallensteen and
Sollenberg, 2000). Many of these cases have involved the suppression of
micro-nationalist strivings or religious resurgence movements, both of which
have, for reasons elaborated in Chapters 7 and 8, often been fed by global¬
ization (Gurr, 1994,2000). On various other occasions states have unleashed
armed force to secure the position of global companies, the implementation
of structural adjustment programmes, or the privileges of an exploitative
local elite that puts greater stakes in global economics and politics than in its
purported ‘homeland’.

In addition, as already noted in Chapter 2, recent globalization has
brought changes to the conduct of war, including new kinds of weapons (like
long-range fighter aircraft) and new kinds of operations (like rapid reaction
forces). With chief reliance on precision bombing, NATO forces suffered not
a single troop casualty in the Kosovo War. Meanwhile the recent ‘war on
terrorism’ has involved satellite remote sensing, monitoring of bank
accounts, and hacking into computers as much as armed combat.

So large-scale globalization has by no means heralded the end of milita¬
rization. The state in a more global world is anything but a postmilitary state.
On the contrary, globalization has given states military equipment of
unprecedented sophistication and destructive potential. Although world
military expenditures declined for several years after the dissolution of the
Soviet Union, by 2000 they had risen once again to $800 billion (FPIF, 2002).
The events of 11 September 2001 have stimulated still further remilitariza¬
tion. Hence the post-Westphalian state has not abjured warfare so much as
pursued it differently.


Increased transstate relations

So far this discussion of states in an increasingly global world has mainly
considered the state acting individually: how it deals with constituents; how
it does or does not provide social protections; how it engages in warfare. But
contemporary globalization has also affected the ways that states act collec¬
tively. As noted earlier, large-scale transplanetary connections and the
pronounced growth of supraterritorial relations have made unilateral state
control of territorial jurisdictions impossible in many important fields of



200 Change and Continuity


policy, yet joint efforts by states can often have considerable effects in regu¬
lating globality and its consequences. As discussed in the next section, much
of this multilateralism has developed through macro-regional and global
regimes with permanent suprastate agencies. In addition, however, consider¬
able multilateral governance has grown in recent decades more informally
(and often outside the public eye) through transstate regulatory processes.

Others have termed these transstate connections ‘transgovernmental rela¬
tions’ or ‘government networks’ (Keohane and Nye, 1977; Slaughter, 2000,
2004). In these instances, officials holding similar functions in different states
interact with each other on matters of common concern. Such transstate
information sharing and policy coordination generally occurs without formal
treaties or permanent suprastate secretariats.

Interstate exchanges between heads of government, diplomatic services
and armed forces go back to the earliest days of modern national govern¬
ments, of course. However, in contemporary history transstate networks
have also developed across a much wider span of the government apparatus.
For example, justice ministries and police from different states now often
collaborate to combat transborder criminal activities. Judges and human
rights commissioners from different country jurisdictions meet to exchange
experiences. Securities and insurance supervisors from multiple states consult
in their oversight of (increasingly globalized) financial markets.
Environmental regulators from various governments cooperate in respect of
ecological problems that transcend state boundaries. Defence, trade and
foreign ministry officials from different states collaborate in non-prolifera¬
tion export control regimes like the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile
Technology Control Regime in respect of materials that could be used to
produce weapons of mass destruction (Joyner, 2004). Health officials from
numerous states work together on transplanetary disease control, while
immigration services from different states collaborate on asylum and refugee
issues. Other transstate networks respectively link central bankers, intellect¬
ual property regulators, labour officials, and parliamentarians.

The scale of this transgovernmental activity should not be underestimated.
Innumerable state bureaucrats maintain daily telephone and email contact
with their counterparts in other states. To take a more particular illustration,
around 40,000 country officials convene each year around issue-based
committees and working groups of the OECD in Paris.

Probably the most pronounced manifestation of transstate governance to
date has been the G7/8 process (Hajnal, 1999; Hodges et al., 1999; Bayne,
2000; Kirton et al., 2001; G8, 2004). This transgovernmental collaboration
on global economic, financial and later also wider questions started as a Group
of Five in 1975, soon expanded to the G7, and became the Group of Eight (G8)
with the addition of Russia in 1998. Begun as a summit for heads of govern¬
ment, the G7 established a separate finance ministers group in 1986 that



Globalization and Governance 201


normally meets 3-4 times per year. Between summits and ministerial meet¬
ings, considerable G7/8 activity takes place outside public view between
senior officials of the respective governments.

Other ‘Gs’ in transstate relations include the Group of Twenty (G20),
created in 1999 as an expansion of the G7 finance ministers to include repre¬
sentatives from so-called ‘emerging markets’ like Brazil, South Korea and
South Africa. The Group of Ten (G10) central bank governors from advanced
industrial countries have met regularly at Basel since 1962 to discuss monetary
and financial matters of common concern. An Intergovernmental Group of
Twenty-Four on International Monetary Affairs (G24) was established in the
early 1970s as a South-based counterpart to the G10, although it has had far
less policy impact (Mayobre, 1999). Meanwhile the Group of Seventy-Seven
(G77), started in 1964 and now in fact numbering 133 states, has linked
governments of the South on questions of the global economy more generally.

Whereas inter-state cooperation of the past normally took formal shape in
treaties, much of contemporary transstate governance has no basis in conven¬
tional international law. At most, the collaboration is set down in a memo¬
randum of understanding (MOU) among the officials concerned. In contrast
to treaties, these MOUs do not require ratification by legislative bodies, so
that transstate relations can easily become technocratic networks that oper¬
ate outside democratic oversight.

Indeed, transgovernmental networks can tend to disaggregate and frag¬
ment the state. A Westphalian state conducted its foreign policy in a relatively
coordinated manner through a single department of external affairs. In
contrast, the state in a more global world engages with other states through
multiple ministries, regulatory agencies, legislatures and courts, all of which
can come to operate with considerable autonomy from each other. In some
cases transministerial cooperation among states can be greater than inter-
ministerial collaboration within the same state. Transgovernmental activities
may also increase divisions within states. For instance, in the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) environment ministers from around the
world have regularly complained about their difficulties with economics
ministers. Likewise, officials from finance ministries and central banks have
often found more commonality of views among themselves in G7/G10/G20
circles than with other departments of their respective states. In such cases
global concerns and connections have loosened the cohesiveness of the state.

In sum, as the preceding pages have indicated, accelerated globalization of
the past half-century has promoted some significant shifts in the character of
the state: different kinds of constituencies; different kinds of welfare and
warfare; and different kinds of interstate relations. Intense globalization has
not meant the end of the state, which is as entrenched in social life as ever;
however, it has meant a transition from Westphalian to post-Westphalian
statehood.



202 Change and Continuity


Multi-scalar public governance

As previously emphasized, the story of governance in the contemporary
globalizing world does not end with the state. The move from Westphalian
to post-Westphalian states is only one aspect of the larger structural shift
from statism to polycentrism. Not only have states themselves become
more decentred and fragmented in current governance, as seen with the rise
of transstate relations. In addition, regulation under conditions of intense
globalization has been increasingly diffused from states to other sites
‘above’ and ‘below’ the country government. This has created a multi¬
scalar and (inasmuch as the layers are densely interconnected) trans-scalar
situation.

Globalization has furthered this dispersion of public-sector governance in
three principal ways. First, as already discussed, the rapid contemporary
growth of global (and especially supraterritorial) relations has made country-
based statist regulation impracticable. Other institutions at municipal,
provincial, macro-regional and transworld levels have moved in to fill the
many resultant gaps in effective governance. Second, globalization has
involved a number of problems (global health issues, global environmental
changes, etc.) in which substate and suprastate agencies may hold a compar¬
ative advantage over states, or at least an important complementary role.
Third, the growth of global communications, global travel, global organiza¬
tion, global finance, global law and global consciousness has provided
substate and suprastate authorities with infrastructures and mindsets to
sustain their operations, including many activities that bypass states.

Indeed, many substate and suprastate governance arrangements have
acquired relative autonomy from states. In other words, these bodies now
often take their own initiatives in regulating a more global world and are not
wholly subordinated to states. Weaker states in particular have become
liable to influence and sometimes even outright domination by public govern¬
ance agencies at other levels. The power of regional and global financial
institutions in much of the South is a well-known example. On the other
hand, the autonomy of substate and suprastate regulatory agencies from
states is limited insofar as these bodies continue to interact with and be
shaped (often heavily) by country governments, especially those of more
powerful states.

Thus in polycentric circumstances no site or level of governance has one¬
way sway over the others. Regulation occurs through interconnections
among multiple locations with different but overlapping spheres of jurisdic¬
tion. The following pages consider in more detail the expansion of transbor¬
der substate governance, the development of suprastate regional regimes, and
the growth of global governance arrangements.



Globalization and Governance 203


Transborder substate governance

Even in statist times, before contemporary large-scale globalization, govern¬
ment was never completely centralized in national bureaucracies. Smaller
territorial sections of state jurisdiction - variously called provinces, federal
states, counties, districts, cantons or departments - had their own governance
institutions. In addition, most villages, towns and cities had their own
governments. Apart from in micro-territories like Andorra or San Marino
where country and local government were the same thing, Westphalian states
delegated a number of regulatory tasks from central bodies to provincial and
municipal agencies.

However, under statist conditions of the territorialist past, non-central
authorities worked entirely within the state context. Only very rarely would
local governments reach out beyond their country to the wider world.
Moreover, if municipal and provincial bodies had contacts with governance
institutions abroad, it would be with the intermediation of their state author¬
ities. Aside from rare exceptions like the first Basque government of 1936-9
(Zubiri, 1999), substate agencies had no ‘foreign policy’ of their own.

These circumstances have altered in the present-day more global world.
For one thing, most states have in recent years undertaken significant addi¬
tional devolution from national to subnational spheres. The many examples
include decentralization by the 74th amendment to the Indian Constitution in
1996, the construction of Flemish and Walloon governments in Belgium by
the constitutional revision of 1980, power transfers from the centre to the
provinces in Argentina, increased autonomy for the Government of Quebec
within Canada, and greater competences for the districts in Uganda.

These devolutions have transpired largely owing to cultural, economic,
historical and political circumstances connected to the particular state in
question; however, globalization has also often encouraged the trend. As
previously emphasized, the growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial
relations has loosened the supreme and absolute rule that states could aim to
exercise in the preceding territorialist context, thereby increasing possibilities
for substate sites of governance to take greater initiative. Indeed, provincial
and municipal authorities can be better suited to handle matters like the organ¬
ization of global spectacles, the provision of infrastructure for global compa¬
nies, and some aspects of the control of transworld infectious diseases and
transworld crime. Moreover, devolution from states to substate institutions
has often come with the explicit urgings and financial sponsorship of supras-
tate agencies like the EU or the multilateral development banks.

In a further departure from statist practices, many substate authorities
have in recent decades developed direct transborder contacts with parties
abroad (Duchacek etal., 1988; Michelmann and Soldatos, 1990; Brown and
Fry, 1993; Hocking, 1993; Aldecoa and Keating, 1999; Breslin and Hook,



204 Change and Continuity


2002; Dai, 2003). These ‘supralocal’ connections have often unfolded with¬
out intermediation by central state governments. Indeed, the ‘paradiplomacy’
pursued in these transborder substate relations has sometimes run counter to
policies prevailing at the state level.

Considerable transborder substate governance has developed between
municipalities. This trend is hardly surprising insofar as transplanetary
telecommunication webs, air corridors, capital flows, diasporas and ecologi¬
cal problems have connected so-called ‘global cities’ like Hong Kong,
London, Los Angeles, Moscow, Paris and Singapore as much to one another
as to their respective hinterlands (Eade, 1997; King, 2000; Sassen, 2001,
2002; Cross and Moore, 2002; Erie, 2004). Yet in small and medium-sized
towns, too, local governments have taken global policy initiatives on matters
such as development cooperation, crime control, environmental degradation
and human rights promotion.

Formal regular transworld contacts between town councils began on a
small scale in the early twentieth century through the International Union of
Local Authorities (IULA), founded in 1913. The practice of twinning towns
began in the 1950s (Handley, 2001). However, global links between munici¬
pal governments have mainly intensified since the late twentieth century. The
various networks include the World Association of Major Metropolises,
launched in 1985, and regional organizations of urban authorities set up for
Arab countries (1967), Africa (1975), Asia (1989), Europe (1990) and Latin
America (1995). In 2004 the IULA, the World Federation of United Towns
(UTO), and the World Associations of Cities and Local Authorities
Coordination (WACLAC) came together to form the World Organization of
United Cities and Local Governments, with several thousand members in
over a hundred countries.

In regard to global ecological issues more specifically, the International
Council for Local Environmental Initiatives, established in 1990, connected
455 municipal authorities across the world as of 2003, in order ‘to achieve
and monitor tangible improvements in global environmental conditions’
(ICLEI, 2003; also UIA, 1998: 951). In addition, the CityNet group has
shared information on sustainable development among dozens of cities in the
Asia-Pacific region. In a more ad hoc fashion, virtual policy forums have
involved city managers from across the planet in electronic consultations on
a variety of issues.

At the level of provinces and federal states, a number of substate govern¬
ments have developed their own departments of foreign affairs. This trend
has gone furthest in Quebec, where the provincial ministry of external affairs
has maintained a staff of 360 people and 24 offices in 17 countries. The
ministry has moreover conducted over 120 missions abroad per year and
concluded more than 400 agreements with foreign governments (Teitelbaum,
2001; Fry, 2006). Other Canadian provincial governments in Alberta, British



Globalization and Governance 205


Columbia and Ontario have pursued transborder relations on a smaller scale.
Nearly 40 of the 50 states of the USA had permanent representations abroad
in 2002, up from just 4 states in 1980; the number of these offices rose from
151 in 1992 to 240 in 2000 (Fry, 1995, 2006). For their part the Lander in
Germany between them have opened some 130 offices around the globe since
the 1970s, mainly as foreign trade and investment bureaux in major export
markets of Asia, Eastern Europe and North America (Kaiser, 2005). In China
the various provincial governments have their own foreign affairs depart¬
ments that operate with considerable autonomy from the central authorities
in Beijing (Goodman and Segal, 1994; Segal, 1994; Breslin, 2000). Australian
states, French regions, Japanese prefectures and Swiss cantons have also
joined the trend of setting up overseas offices.

Some provincial governments have also bypassed the central state to
develop direct links with suprastate agencies. For example, federal states in
both Brazil and India have had direct dealings with the World Bank. Several
provincial regulatory bodies have their own affiliation to the International
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), separately from the coun¬
try authorities. In Europe, a Committee of the Regions established under the
1992 Maastricht Treaty has formalized direct consultations between supra¬
state institutions of the EU and substate tiers of government in the member-
states. By 1996 there were 115 representative offices of substate regions in
Brussels (Keating, 1999: 6). Launched in 1989, the INTERREG programme
of the EU has provided several billion euros to fund transborder cooperation
between substate governments on issues such as energy, environmental
protection, tourism, and transportation. In 1999 the UN Human Settlements
Programme (UN-HABITAT) launched a Global Campaign on Urban
Governance that gave the transplanetary organization direct connections
with municipal governments.

In some other cases substate regional governments have pursued their own
multilateral collaboration with one another, separately from both state and
suprastate authorities. For example, in Western Europe the so-called ‘Four
Motors’ network, in operation since 1988, has linked Baden-Wiirttemberg,
Catalonia, Lombardy and Rhone-Alpes in collaboration on commercial,
cultural, educational, environmental and technological matters. Meanwhile
substate authorities in Bavaria, Quebec, Shandong, Upper Austria and the
Western Cape have formed a multilateral partnership in respect of hi-tech
industries. In northern Scandinavia the Saami Council has linked the local
parliaments of indigenous peoples in Finland, Norway and Sweden.

Other ventures by substate authorities into transborder relations have
been more ad hoc. For example, local authorities in Tatarstan have asserted
their independence from the Kremlin in dealing with global capital. Likewise,
many provincial governments in China have bypassed Beijing to pursue direct
relations with global companies. Governors from three southern states of the



206 Change and Continuity


USA travelled to Germany to present competing incentive packages for a
global firm to invest in their jurisdictions. State, county and city governments
took the lead in imposing sanctions by the USA against the apartheid regime
in South Africa when the country government under Ronald Reagan was
slow to adopt restrictive measures (Fry, 1998: 5). Similarly, the State of
Massachusetts put its own sanctions on Burma in 1997, although on this
occasion a federal court overruled the policy.

As this last example well illustrates, none of the growth of transborder
substate relations has signalled the end of states as significant sites of regula¬
tion. The European Commission’s Director of Science and Technology
almost certainly exaggerated when declaring in 1994 that: ‘in just a few
decades, nation-states. . . will no longer be so relevant. Instead, rich regions
built around cities such as Osaka, San Francisco and the four motors of
Europe will acquire effective power’ (quoted in Runyan, 1996: 242).

Moreover, although substate authorities have often gained greater auto¬
nomy from the state in the context of accelerated globalization, they have not
necessarily gained greater policy initiative overall. After all, like states,
municipal and provincial governments have faced pressures to accommodate
global companies, global financial markets and global civil society associa¬
tions as well as (or more than) their local constituents. In addition, substate
agencies have in contemporary history had to contend not only with the state,
but also with growing sites of suprastate governance that hold macro-
regional and transworld remits.


Macro-regional governance

In addition to the micro-regionalization within states just described, global¬
ization has also unfolded together with - and in several ways encouraged - a
trend of macro-regionalization among states (Fawcett and Hurrell, 1995;
Gamble and Payne, 1996; Mansfield and Milner, 1997; Coleman and
Underhill, 1998; Hettne et al., 1999, 2000, 2001; Hook and Kearns, 1999;
Hout and Grugel, 1999; Schulz et al., 2001; Breslin et al., 2002). No fewer
than 109 regional trade agreements were reported to the GATT between
1948 and 1994 (The Economist , 1995:27-8). The decade of the 1990s alone
saw 93 such accords reported to the GATT/WTO. Other macro-regional
schemes like the League of Arab States and the Organization of American
States (OAS) have focused more on diplomatic and military concerns. To be
sure, some of these regional governance initiatives have not developed
beyond paper agreements. However, others have involved a substantial
growth of suprastate laws and institutions.

Macro-regionalization of governance has transpired across the world. The
most far-reaching instances have occurred in Europe, where 50 years of progres¬
sive widening and deepening of macro-regional regulation has culminated in



Globalization and Governance 207


today’s European Union, encompassing 25 countries after a fifth enlargement
in 2004, and Council of Europe, with 45 member states. Outside Europe,
other significant macro-regional governance projects have developed in
Central America (1960), East Africa (1967-77, relaunched in 1991), South
East Asia (1968), the Caribbean (1973), West Africa (1975 and 1994),
Southern Africa (1980 and 1993), the Persian Gulf (1981), Central Asia
(1984), South Asia (1985), Central Europe (1989), the Black Sea area (1993),
North America (1994) and the cone of South America (1995). Negotiations
to form a Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) across the Western
Hemisphere have stalled since 2003, but the vision has not been abandoned.

In addition, the decades of accelerated globalization have witnessed the
development of several intercontinental transregional initiatives. For
instance, as its name suggests, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) has spanned North America and Europe since its creation in 1949.
Meanwhile the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has come to link 55 participating states from Central Asia, Europe
and North America. In the Southern Hemisphere 23 states of Africa and
South America have since 1986 formed a Zone of Peace and Cooperation of
the South Atlantic with periodic ministerial meetings. Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation, an intergovernmental forum with 21 member
economies from along the Pacific Rim, has pursued economic and security
questions through multiple gatherings since 1989 (Ravenhill, 2001; Riiland
et al., 2002).

Certain macro-regional entities have embarked on their own relations
with each other, introducing a new multilateralism of regions alongside the
old multilateralism of states. For example, the EU has maintained formal
connections with the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) since
1980, the Andean Pact since 1983, and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
since 1989. The EU and the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR)
launched an Inter-Regional Framework Cooperation Scheme in 1995. Since
1996 regular Asia-Europe Meetings (ASEM) have linked the EU and so-
called ‘ASEAN+3’ (China, Japan and South Korea) (Stokhof and Van der
Velde, 1999; Gilson, 2002). On the whole, however, this trend toward inter¬
regionalism has so far remained modest (Riiland et al., forthcoming).

Like substate agencies with transborder relations, some macro-regional
governance frameworks have acquired a notable degree of autonomy from
states. True, states have instigated regional projects and remain prominent
participants in regionalization. However, in some ways states have also been
constrained to ‘go regional’, for example, in order adequately to respond to
global capital and transplanetary ecological problems. Moreover, macro-
regional governance has in a number of cases developed to a point that the
regimes have acquired authority over member states as well as vice versa.

The EU in particular has gone beyond an interstate arrangement to a



208 Change and Continuity


suprastate regime (Marks et al., 1996; Richardson, 1996; Cram et al.,
1999; Hix, 1999; Rosamond, 2000; Wallace and Wallace, 2000). It has its
own Commission, Parliament, Court of Justice, and Central Bank, together
with a distinct European currency launched in 2002 and some 80,000
regulatory measures generated by 2000. By the early 1990s some 40 per
cent of all civil servants (local and national) within the member countries
regularly were in contact with EU matters (Risse, 2000). The EU has also
emerged as a distinct actor in global politics, with its own Common Foreign
and Security Policy (CFSP), its own overseas development regime (the
Yaounde, Lome and Cotonou agreements), its own delegations in over 120
countries, its own participation in G7/8 and WTO meetings, and observer
status in most UN bodies (C. Rhodes, 1996; Piening, 1997; Bretherton and
Vogler, 1999; Jorgensen and Rosamond, 2002). On the other hand, the
scale of the EU apparatus should not be overstated, as its budget in 2000
amounted to only 1.2 per cent of the collective GDP of its member countries
(Jorgensen and Rosamond, 2002: 194). Indeed, some of the major EU
member governments have proposed to reduce even this low figure to 1.0
per cent.

How is macro-regionalization related to globalization: as stepping-stone
or stumbling block (Hettne etal., 1999: xix)? In some respects, the two trends
have been complementary. For one thing, technologies of supraterritorial
communication and travel have made possible tight coordination of activities
on both macro-regional and global scales. In addition, macro-regional
common markets have provided efficiency and economies of scale for the
production, distribution and sale of global products (Chesnais et al., 2000).
In this vein one critical research and advocacy group has talked of globaliza¬
tion being ‘corporate led and EU fed’ (Balanya et al., 2000). Furthermore,
macro-regional governance arrangements have often proved to be an effec¬
tive mechanism for the administration of global norms, for instance, in areas
such as human rights and technical standardization. Moreover, the growth of
global consciousness has prepared people intellectually for the construction
of suprastate regional frameworks. Indeed, various observers have suggested
that macro-regional integration serves as an intermediate stage towards full-
scale globality (Tober, 1993:101; Hettne, 1994).

On the other hand, in some respects regionalization can also unfold in
opposition to globalization. After all, regionality carves up the planet, whereas
globality spans the planet. Regionality follows territorial logic, whereas glob¬
ality often transcends territoriality. Regionalism can be a reaction against
globalism, serving as a macronationalist, neoprotectionist defence against the
turbulence of globalizing capitalism, the imposition of global cultures, and so
on. Some EU controls on external trade and ever-tightening restrictions on
immigration into the region well illustrate this reactive dynamic. Thus Helen
Wallace (1996:17) has suggested that ‘European integration can also be seen



Globalization and Governance 209


as [an] effort to contain the consequences of globalization . . . and to harden
the boundary between [West Europeans] and the rest of the world.’

Yet others have looked to macro-regionalization as a positive strategy
towards globalization, as a way to enhance self-determination in the gover¬
nance of a more global world. Many Japanese policymakers have promoted
regionalization in East Asia in this vein after the crisis of 1997-8, for exam¬
ple, with proposals for an Asian Monetary Fund (AMF) and the New
Miyazawa Initiative to strengthen financial systems in the region. Meanwhile
many Japan-based firms have pursued a regionalization of production in East
Asia to sustain their global competitiveness (Hughes, 2005).

To be sure, globalization has not been the only force propelling the prolif¬
eration and growth of suprastate regional projects in contemporary history.
Local, country and region-specific circumstances have also determined where
and when regionalization has taken place, how far, in what forms, at what
speeds, and so on. However, macro-regional schemes would not have
appeared in such numbers - and developed as far as they have - in the absence
of a concurrent large-scale growth of global relations.


Transworld governance

Of course suprastate governance involves more than regional arrangements.
As noted in Chapter 2, globality has legal aspects in terms of formal rules and
regulatory agencies that have a transplanetary scope. As indicated in Chapter

3, the greatest growth of global governance institutions and associated legal
instruments has occurred in recent decades. Indeed, as described in Chapter

4, these regulatory organizations have established many norms and rules that
have facilitated accelerated globalization over the past half-century.

Large-scale contemporary globalization has created needs for significant
elements of transworld governance. HIV/AIDS, the Internet, air travel,
refugee movements, transplanetary money flows, climate change, and much
more cannot be effectively regulated without a substantial global dimension
to the regime. Unprecedented amounts of global governance are therefore
unavoidable and indispensable in the twenty-first century (although how one
pursues global governance is substantially a matter of political choice).

Today several thousand multilateral agreements on culture, ecology,
finance, health, human rights, military affairs and trade apply to global
spheres. Organs of the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions, the
WTO, the BIS, the OECD, and the Commonwealth are prominent examples
of governance bodies with a global remit. Several transworld institutions
have a direct presence globally. For example, UNDP has some 150 Country
Offices, while the IMF and the World Bank each maintain resident missions
in over 70 countries. Moreover, these global governance organizations
execute their mandates using transworld communications networks and



210 Change and Continuity


transplanetary bureaucracies with staff and funds drawn from all corners of
the world.

One outstanding example of expanded global governance is the World
Trade Organization (Hoekman and Kostecki, 1995; Jackson, 1998; Krueger,
1998; Sampson, 2001; Cohn, 2002). Established in 1995, the Geneva-based
WTO has obtained a larger membership, a far wider agenda, and substant¬
ially greater enforcement capacities than any previous transplanetary trade
regime. Over 140 states have joined the WTO, and a queue of others waits to
enter. The organization has addressed not only traditional concerns with
cross-border exchange of merchandise, but also matters such as trade in
services, intellectual property issues, electronic commerce, trade-related
investment, competition policy and environmental questions.

The contemporary global trade regime has powers that extend beyond
those of its state members. Under the 1994 Marrakech Agreement that
created the WTO, member-states commit themselves (with no reservations
allowed) to alter their national statutes and procedures to comply with
suprastate trade law. Even the US Supreme Court has recognized, in a 1999
judgment, the higher authority of WTO rules. The Trade Policy Review Body
of the WTO conducts periodic surveillance of member governments’
commercial measures. Alleged violations of WTO rules are submitted to a
Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), where panels of experts reach decisions that
are binding unless every state party to the global trade regime (including the
initial complainant) votes to overturn the advice. In the first nine years of the
WTO’s existence over 300 trade disputes were tabled for DSB consideration.
Many more WTO-related cases have been settled through informal negotia¬
tion and pressure. Formally, of course, states have had the ‘sovereign prerog¬
ative’ whether or not to join and comply with the WTO. However, the forces
of a globalizing economy, coupled with the prevailing neoliberalist discourse
that extols trade liberalization, have heavily constrained this supposed ‘free
will’. Indeed, to date no state has rejected the Marrakech Agreement outright.

Other considerable growth in public global economic governance has
occurred through the International Monetary Fund (Denters, 1996; James,
1996; Blustein, 2001; Boughton, 2001). During the first 30 years after it
started work in 1946, the Washington-based IMF held a modest brief to
establish and then manage the Bretton Woods regime of fixed exchange rates.
However, since the 1970s the Fund has intervened more intensely with its
client governments. For one thing, the ‘second-generation’ IMF has under¬
taken comprehensive and detailed surveillance of economic performance: of
its 184 member-states (annually); of the world economy as a whole (biannu-
ally); and since 1998 of certain macro-regions as well. In addition, the IMF
has supplied major training and technical assistance services, largely in order
to provide poorly equipped states with staff and tools that can better handle
the policy challenges of globalization. The IMF Institute has taken over



Globalization and Governance 211


21,000 officials from around the globe through its programmes since it
opened in 1964 (IMF, 2003c). Furthermore, the Fund has gone beyond its
traditional stabilization measures (which correct short-term problems with
the balance of payments) to sponsor wide-ranging economic restructuring
programmes in over 80 countries. Finally, the IMF has since the 1980s
played a pivotal role in responding to crises in global finance, including emer¬
gencies of recent years in Asia, Russia, Latin America and Turkey. To the
extent that the Fund has acted as a lender of last resort in such situations and
has addressed questions concerning the supervision of global capital
markets, it has acted as something of a suprastate central bank. Meanwhile
the Bank for International Settlements has since 1974 developed some
general principles for the oversight of global commercial banking, for exam¬
ple, on matters including capital adequacy ratios as well as payment and
settlement systems.

The much-expanded activities of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development further illustrate the contemporary growth of
global economic governance (Sullivan, 1997; Ougaard, 2004: ch 5). With a
Paris-based secretariat expanded to 2,300 people, the OECD today convenes
some 200 committees, working parties, and expert groups. In the 30 years
after 1970, the number of OECD instruments (that is, decisions, recommen¬
dations, agreements, etc.) multiplied more than tenfold. These measures have
especially addressed the environment, taxation, and transworld investment,
although they have also extended across every major policy area except mili¬
tary affairs. Like the WTO and the IMF, the OECD has acquired a significant
role in policy surveillance. At regular intervals (usually every 18 months) the
organization releases an authoritative assessment of the macroeconomic
conditions of each of its 30 member-states, including suggestions for policy
adjustments. Increasingly, officials from certain non-member governments
have observed OECD proceedings on issues of concern to them, so that, for
example, states with offshore finance centres have closely followed OECD
deliberations on taxation questions and money laundering.

The acceleration of global ecological degradation has also prompted a
significant expansion of transworld governance in recent history (Porter et
al., 2000; Miles et al., 2002). Some 900 multilateral environmental agree¬
ments have come into force to date, including conventions signed in respect
of supraterritorial problems such as depletion of stratospheric ozone (1985),
climate change (1992), and loss of biological diversity (1992). Other treaties
have addressed so-called ‘global commons’ such as Antarctica and the deep
seas. Since the 1970s most of the principal transworld regulatory agencies
have created special organs and programmes to address ecological issues. The
many initiatives of this kind include the OECD Environment Committee
(1970), the World Bank Environment Department (1987), the UN
Commission on Sustainable Development (1993), and the WTO Committee



212 Change and Continuity


on Trade and Environment (1995). That said, other major initiatives in trans¬
planetary ecological governance like the Kyoto Protocol on global warming
have struggled to gain acceptance (Victor, 2004).

Elsewhere, global governance has grown as an instrument of conflict
management. In this vein the United Nations has undertaken over 30 peace¬
keeping operations since 1956 and several humanitarian interventions in the
1990s (Mayall, 1996). Even the usually sovereignty-obsessed government of
China has endorsed the concept of UN peacekeeping and has since 1989
moreover participated in some of these activities (Kim, 1994: 49-53). A
global Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) has been administered
through the International Atomic Energy Agency since 1970. Other global
arms control regimes have addressed biological and chemical weapons.

The period of accelerated globalization has also witnessed unprecedented
growth of suprastate governance in respect of human rights. In the area of
workers’ rights, for example, the ILO has come to monitor a trans¬
planetary code encompassing (as of 2003) 185 Conventions and 194
Recommendations. Several other global legal instruments on human rights
(for example, concerning torture, racial discrimination and the protection of
children) have acquired supervisory committees under the UN Secretariat.
Interestingly, from the perspective of global governance, these UN commit¬
tees consist of experts who act in their personal capacity rather than as repre¬
sentatives of states. Meanwhile the UN Commission on Human Rights,
which is composed of government delegates, has since 1970 undertaken over
60 official examinations of country situations. Hardly any state now invokes
(as Burma did in 1996) the ‘domestic jurisdiction’ clause of the United
Nations Charter to deny entry to a UN human rights mission.

On occasion global human rights governance has even brought individu¬
als (rather than states) to justice, intimating the introduction of something
like cosmopolitan law. Ad hoc global tribunals to investigate crimes against
humanity were created after World War II and again in the 1990s to address
genocide in Rwanda and war in former Yugoslavia. The extradition of
Slobodan Milosovic to the Hague Tribunal in 2001 marked the first time in
history that a person was charged under international law for offences
performed as a head of state. A permanent International Criminal Court was
established in Rome in 2002, although its statute has not been ratified by
several major states including China, Russia and the USA. In addition, the
UN and other suprastate agencies have promoted the creation of national
human rights commissions and ombudspersons, helping to raise their
number during the 1990s from around a dozen to around a hundred
(Cardenas, 2003).

Global regulatory agencies have also engaged in other aspects of state
building. For example, in postconflict situations the UN has undertaken
direct administration of Bosnia, Cambodia, East Timor, Haiti, Kosovo and



Globalization and Governance 213


South West Africa (now Namibia) (Wilde, 2001). The UN has also provided
assistance and supervision for scores of national elections after 1990
(Findlay, 1995: 49). The World Bank has since the mid-1990s given consid¬
erable attention to reforming state and substate governance in areas such as
the civil service, the judiciary and labour legislation. Technical assistance
from the IMF has developed central bank and finance ministry capacities in
many weak states. Thus the construction of governance institutions has not
been a one-way affair: not only have states built up macro-regional and
transworld institutions, but suprastate bodies have on numerous occasions
also built up states.

Of course, it is important not to overestimate the growth of global govern¬
ance just described. Transplanetary regulatory frameworks have been
riddled with neglected issues, double standards, limited enforcement, poor
coordination between institutions, understaffing, underfunding and low
legitimacy. To note but one neglected issue, global governance has accom¬
plished little in the area of public schemes for binding regulation of
transworld companies. In terms of resource limitations, the UN has a smaller
budget than the New York Fire Department and a smaller staff than the City
of Stockholm. Global economic institutions, too, have had restricted operat¬
ing budgets (in 1996) of only $1,375 million for the World Bank, $471
million for the IMF, and just $93 million for the WTO (World Bank, 1996:
155; IMF, 1996: 217; WTO-2, 1996a: 153). The BIS is unique in being able
to fund its work from the income of its own activities, without needing to
solicit contributions from member states.

Thus, contrary to some expectations, global governance is not - and
currently shows no sign of becoming - global government (Zolo, 1997;
Heinrichsohn, 2000). Globalization is not leading to the creation of a central¬
ized world state, where Westphalian-style sovereignty is transferred
‘upwards’ from the country to the global level. As this chapter has made
plain, regulation in today’s globalizing world occurs in a polycentric manner
through macro-regional, state and substate authorities as well as global
arrangements. Moreover, the principle of subsidiarity has generally weighed
strongly in contemporary governance, so that global regulation has tended to
devolve for implementation to macro-regional, state and local institutions.
Indeed, on the whole global governance frameworks currently have very
limited and fragile legitimacy in the public eye. Most citizens are barely aware
that transworld regulatory arrangements exist.

Yet these substantial shortcomings do not negate the crucial point that
post-Westphalian governance involves notable global laws and institutions.
The rapid growth of transplanetary regulation has not heralded a demise of
the state, but it has confirmed the end of statist governance. Although it is
states that have created transplanetary governance institutions, they have
done so under substantial constraints of globalization. Nor have states fully



214 Change and Continuity


controlled the actions and further development of transworld authorities
once the latter are established.


Privatized governance

Governance has become polycentric under the influence of globalization not
only with the diffusion of regulation across multiple layers of the public
sector, but also by the spread of private, non-statutory frameworks of rules
(cf. Cutler et al., 1999; Ronit and Schneider, 2000; Briihl, 2001; Haufler,
2001; Knill and Lehmkuhl, 2002; Hall and Biersteker, 2003). Given statist
conditions of the past, one might easily assume that governance is by defini¬
tion a public operation through governmental and intergovernmental agenc¬
ies. However, the formulation, implementation, monitoring and enforcement
of societal rules could in principle also occur through nonofficial channels
like market-based agencies and civil society organizations.

Contemporary globalization has encouraged a substantial privatization of
governance in two main ways. First, a number of private regulatory arrange¬
ments have arisen to fill regulatory gaps in suprastate governance. Although
transworld and macro-regional regimes have undergone unprecedented
degrees and rates of expansion in recent history, this growth has often still
lagged well behind the regulatory needs of expanded global relations.
Various areas - including global markets and global finance - have suffered
major governance deficits as a result. In a number of cases non-governmental
actors have stepped in where public regulatory frameworks have been defi¬
cient or absent. The private agencies have then constructed the necessary
standards and norms that enable increased global relations to develop.

Second, the prevailing neoliberalist approach to contemporary globaliza¬
tion has also promoted the rise of private regulation. The logic of neoliberal¬
ism can easily move from prescribing the privatization of production to
advocating the privatization of governance. At an extreme, neoliberalists
might affirm that the global private sector can - together with consumer and
other stakeholder pressure in the marketplace - adequately regulate itself.

Like most phenomena connected with contemporary globalization,
private global governance is not completely new to recent history. For exam¬
ple, in the second half of the nineteenth century a number of business associ¬
ations created standard forms of contract to govern cross-border trade in
commodities such as corn and cotton (Wiener, 1999: 165). However, the
scale of current private regulation far outstrips anything seen in the past.

Moreover, private global governance of earlier times tended to be sanc¬
tioned by intergovernmental treaty, so that states retained considerable
initiative and control of the overall process. To be sure, approval or at least
tolerance of states (especially big states) remains necessary for the operation



Globalization and Governance 215


of today’s private regulatory arrangements. Yet much recent private govern¬
ance has arisen with little direct involvement of governments.

One major contemporary growth area of private governance of globaliza¬
tion are schemes of so-called ‘corporate social responsibility’, sometimes also
termed ‘corporate citizenship’ (Zadek etal., 1997; Zadek 2001; Andriof and
McIntosh, 2001). Official suprastate measures to regulate transborder
companies have remained either moribund (like the UN Centre for
Transnational Corporations code of 1979), or weak (like the UN Global
Compact launched in 2000), or unratified (like the draft UN Norms on the
Responsibilities of Transnational Corporations of 2003), or highly general in
terms (like the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, first issued in
1976 and subsequently revised), or very narrow in focus (like the 2003 WHO
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control). However, non-statutory rules
for transborder enterprises have proliferated since the 1990s, especially
regarding labour, environmental and human rights practices (cf. Hopkins,
1999; Richter, 2001; Jenkins et al., 2002; Abrahams, 2004; Bendell, 2004).
By 2002 around 4,000 of the 65,000 transnational corporations were
promising social and environmental reports (Utting, 2006).

Private CSR frameworks have taken several forms. Some of these volun¬
tary codes for transborder firms are self-regulatory arrangements. That is, the
schemes are operated either by a single company over its own activities or by
a group of companies over their own sector. For example, Nike and Unilever
have developed company-based codes (which notionally also cover their
subcontractors and suppliers), while the International Council of Toy
Industries has overseen an umbrella code for the sector. Outside consultants
have devised other CSR arrangements like the Global Reporting Initiative
(GRI), started in 1997, and the Social Accountability Standard SA8000,
operational since 1998. Some civil society groups have also promulgated CSR
standards. For example, Amnesty International issued its Human Rights
Principles for Companies in 1998, while scores of Christian associations have
used the Interfaith Center on Global Corporate Responsibility to screen firms
for investment. Recent years have also seen the emergence of so-called ‘multi¬
stakeholder initiatives’ involving firms, labour unions and NGOs in jointly
pursued nonofficial regulatory arrangements for global business. Tike the
consultancy schemes, multi-stakeholder initiatives involve standard setting,
independent monitoring, certification and reporting. Examples include the
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), which has since 1993 linked timber
companies, workers, environmentalists and indigenous peoples in efforts to
promote sustainable logging (Humphreys, 1996, 2003).

Other significant private global governance has expanded since the 1970s in
respect of commercial adjudication. Whereas states have submitted their trade
conflicts to a public body, the GATT/WTO, global companies have tended to
handle their disputes through private arbitration, thus avoiding litigation in



216 Change and Continuity


state or suprastate courts (Dezalay and Garth, 1996; Mattli, 2001;
Lehmkuhl, 2003). The available mechanisms include the International Court
of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce, the London Court
of Arbitration (LCA), and the China International Economic Trade
Arbitration Commission (CIETAC). The New York Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (1958) stipulates
that national courts cannot review the judgements of arbitrators on core
issues. To give one indication of the scale of this private governance practice,
the Secretariat of the ICC had received 10,000 requests for arbitration by
1998, more than two-thirds of them since 1976 (Craig et al., 1998: 2).

In addition to global production and trade, much private governance has
also applied to transplanetary finance (Porter and Coleman, 2002). The
many relevant sites include the International Chamber of Commerce
Commission on Banking Technique and Practice, the World Federation of
Exchanges (for securities markets), and the Derivatives Policy Group (with
members drawn from academics and investment bankers). Bodies like the
International Accounting Standards Board and the International Federation
of Accountants have respectively developed the main global accountancy and
auditing norms currently in use. Rating agencies like Moody’s and Standard
&amp; Poors have also played something of an unofficial policing role in the
contemporary global economy, rewarding governments and companies that
score well and punishing those that rate poorly (Levich, 2002; Sinclair,
2005).

Considerable additional privatized governance has emerged in relation to
global information and communications. For example, the International
Telecommunication Union has moved from being an intergovernmental
organization to a hybrid construction with 600 affiliated companies as well
as 189 member states (Salter, 1999). Titles and addresses in cyberspace are
regulated through the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers, created in 1998 with operations that involve business, technical,
academic and user inputs (Franda, 2001: ch 2).

Multiple further instances of private governance of globalization can be
found across other sectors. The International Organization for
Standardization, formally a nongovernmental body, has often agreed its
measures together with the major companies involved (Clapp, 1998). The
ICC’s Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits have been
accepted by banking associations in 175 countries (Wiener, 1999: 183). The
International Air Transport Association (IATA) has standardized airline
documentation. The Rome-based Codex Alimentarius Commission has set
global food standards with considerable inputs from industry. The World
Tourism Organization (‘the other WTO’) has a Business Council that
includes representatives of different facets of the industry in 70 countries. The
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has donated more for health care



Globalization and Governance 217


programmes in Africa than WHO has had available from governmental
contributions. Between 1974 and 2004 some 90 so-called ‘public-private
partnerships’ were established to combat global diseases. The vast majority
of these ‘PPPs’ have emerged since the mid-1990s (IPPPH, 2004; also Reich,
2002 ).

Finally, substantial privatization of governance has occurred in the
course of contemporary globalization in the form of ‘contracting out’ the
delivery of public services to private providers. For instance, non-profit
organizations have come to figure prominently in the supply of humanitar¬
ian relief. The mid-1990s annual budgets of the giants in this field included
$586 million for CARE International, $419 million for World Vision
International, and $350 million each for Oxfam and Save the Children
(Smillie, 1999: 17-18). By comparison, the operating budget for the UN
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has run at about $1,000
million per annum. Not surprisingly, in view of these resource constraints,
UNHCR in 1998 maintained connections with more than 500 non-profit
organizations as ‘Partners in Action’ (UNHCR, 1999). Likewise, bilateral
and multilateral donor organizations have since the 1970s made far more
use of non-profit bodies (rather than official agencies) to execute develop¬
ment assistance projects.

Outsourcing has even extended to military operations. Mercenaries more
or less vacated the world scene by the late eighteenth century, but these
soldiers-for-hire have reappeared (usually on a small scale) in recent decades
in various armed conflicts, for example, in Angola, Chechnya, former
Yugoslavia, and elsewhere. Moreover, the 1990s saw the rise for the first time
of private military companies. Examples include South Africa-based
Executive Outcomes and US-based Military Professional Resources, Inc.
These firms have mainly provided logistical support for state armies or
protection for business premises, but they can also offer direct combat capa¬
cities. For example, Executive Outcomes was contracted to undertake
humanitarian operations in Sierra Leone in the mid-1990s (Shearer, 1998;
Zarate, 1998; Brayton, 2002; Mandel, 2002; Singer, 2003).

The merits or otherwise of private governance - in regard to social
justice and democracy, for example - are considered in Part III of this
book. The point at the present juncture is to note that contemporary glob¬
alization has brought with it a considerable privatization of regulation.
Polycentric governance involves not only multiple scales of regulatory
activity, but also the spread of private alongside public mechanisms of
governance. Inasmuch as this privatization has responded to the slow
development of official regulatory arrangements in various areas of glob¬
alization, together with prevailing neoliberalist doctrine, the trend could
be reversed as and when neoliberalism recedes and more public-sector
frameworks are constructed.



218 Change and Continuity


(Global) civil society

Given all of the developments reviewed above, globalization has fostered a
considerable dispersal of regulatory competences across substate, state,
suprastate and private sites of governance. This shift from statism to poly¬
centrism has in turn had important implications for civil society activity.

The concept ‘civil society’ has meant many things since it appeared in
sixteenth-century English political thought (Chambers and Kymlicka, 2002;
Cohen and Arato, 1992). In today’s context we might conceive of civil society
as a political space, or arena, where self-generated associations of citizens seek,
from outside political parties, to shape the rules that govern social life. Civil
society groups bring citizens together non-coercively in deliberate attempts to
mould the formal laws and informal norms that regulate social relations.

Civil society associations assemble people who share concerns about a
particular policy issue. The many examples of civil society activity include
anti-poverty campaigns, business forums, consumer advocates, criminal
syndicates, pro-democracy groups, development cooperation initiatives,
environmental movements, ethnic lobbies, faith-based associations, human
rights promoters, labour unions, local community groups, peace advocates,
peasant movements, philanthropic foundations, professional bodies, relief
organizations, think tanks, women’s networks, youth associations, and
more. Civil society therefore includes - but also ranges far wider than -
NGOs. The huge diversity of civil society groups is evident not only in their
broad range of focal issues, but also in their multifarious organizational
forms, constituencies, capacity levels, geographical scopes, ideological
persuasions, strategic visions, and campaign tactics.

With its concern to shape the rules of social life, civil society activity
unfolds in relation to a governance apparatus. In former circumstances of
statism, when governance came down to government, civil society functioned
in relation to the state. However, when the framework of governance changes
- as it has done with contemporary globalization - the character of civil soci¬
ety may be expected to alter in tandem (Scholte, 2002a). In today’s more
polycentric condition, civil society associations have redirected some of their
attention from states to other sites and networks of governance, including
global regulatory arrangements. An unofficial ‘new multilateralism’ of civil
society associations has arisen alongside the official multilateralism of global
governance agencies (Schechter, 1999b; O’Brien etal., 2000).

Recent history has therefore witnessed a major rise of what analysts have
variously called transnational/global social movements (Smith et al., 1997;
Porta etal., 1999; Cohen and Rai, 2000; Guidry etal., 2000; Khagram etal.,
2002; Smith and Johnston, 2002), transnational advocacy networks (Keck
and Sikkink, 1998), global citizen action (Edwards and Gaventa, 2001), and
transnational/global civil society (Lipschutz, 1992; Drainville, 1998; Florini,



Globalization and Governance 219


2000; Scholte, 2000; Anheier et al., 2001; Glasius et al., 2002; Clark, 2003;
Kaldor, 2003; Taylor, 2004; Germain and Kenny, 2005). Like most features
of contemporary globalization, civil society mobilization beyond the nation¬
state-country is not completely new. As noted in Chapter 3, labour, peace,
racial, religious and women’s movements had already developed a
transworld dimension in the nineteenth century. However, the scale of this
earlier global civil society activity was much smaller than that of today.

Contemporary civil society has ‘gone global’ in at least seven important
ways. First, many civil society associations have begun to address the govern¬
ance of transplanetary problems. The multiple examples include arms
control, asylum seekers, climate change, cultural protection, debt relief, digi¬
tal inclusion, gender equity, HIV/AIDS, human rights, labour standards, reli¬
gious revivalism, and trade agreements. Indeed, recent years have seen
considerable civil society activism around the general theme of globalization
itself, in what have been variously termed ‘anti-globalization’, ‘alter-global-
ization’, ‘counter-globalization’ and ‘global justice’ movements (Bourdieu,
1998; Klein, 2000, 2002; Rupert, 2000; Starr, 2000; Broad, 2002).
Prominent initiatives in this vein have included Peoples’ Global Action
(PGA), started in 1998, and the World Social Forum process, launched in
2001 (Houtart and Polet, 2001; Sen et al., 2004).

Second, civil society activities have obtained global qualities by engaging
with transplanetary governance institutions. Countless civil society associa¬
tions have addressed themselves to UN agencies, the World Bank, the IMF
and the WTO, often ‘leapfrogging’ over states to contact the global bodies
directly (Weiss and Gordenker, 1996; Willetts, 1996; Fox and Brown, 1998;
Foster with Anand, 1999; Scholte, 2002b; Scholte, 2004d). Indeed, a number
of civil society associations have opened bureaux near the headquarters of
suprastate governance organizations. For instance, the ICFTU, the Institute
of International Finance (IIF), and Oxfam all maintain offices in walking
distance from the headquarters of the IMF and the World Bank. In response,
as is considered further in Chapter 11, many governance agencies dealing
with global issues have devised mechanisms of one kind or another to engage
(at least to some extent) with civil society associations.

A third global aspect of much contemporary civil society activity is its use
of transplanetary and supraterritorial travel and communications. Air trans¬
port has enabled civil society actors from across the planet to convene in
frequent global meetings, including parallel forums alongside many official
global governance conferences (Pianta, 2001). Between such face-to-face
encounters, telecommunications, computer networks and electronic mass
media have allowed today’s civil society groups to maintain more or less
instantaneous connections with one another across the world. The Internet
has proved to be a particular boon to global citizen activism (Lee, 1996;
Harcourt, 1999; Naughton, 2001; Warkentin, 2001).



220 Change and Continuity


Civil society has also become global in the fourth sense of adopting global
organizational forms. Some of these transplanetary associations are unitary
and centralized, like the Geneva-based World Economic Forum, which has
since the early 1970s assembled transworld companies (now numbering
some 900) under the motto of ‘entrepreneurship in the global public inter¬
est’. Alternatively, the transplanetary association may take a federal form, as
in the case of the Brussels-based ICFTU, with several hundred affiliated
national labour organizations. Initiatives like Shack/Slum Dwellers
International and the StreetNet alliance of street vendors have developed
transworld networks among local initiatives. Meanwhile other global civil
society associations have operated without a coordinating secretariat. An
illustrative example is the aforementioned PGA, which has mainly operated
through a website.

Fifth, parts of contemporary civil society development have been helped
by global finance. Several foundations with global operations have been
particularly important in this regard. For example, the Friedrich Ebert
Stiftung has funded many labour movement initiatives across the world. The
Ford Foundation has supported NGOs in dozens of countries. George Soros
has ploughed some of his billions gained from foreign exchange speculation
and hedge funds into civil society development through his Open Society
Institutes in former communist-ruled countries and Turkey.

Sixth, considerable elements of contemporary civil society have become
global inasmuch as they are motivated by sentiments of transplanetary solidar¬
ity (Johnson and Taxer, 2003). For example, as is elaborated further in Chapter
7, many civil society groups have built on a sense of collective identity that tran¬
scends territory - for example, on lines of age, class, disability, gender, profes¬
sion, race, religious faith or sexual orientation. In addition, significant amounts
of civil society activity are today driven by cosmopolitan inspirations to provide
security, justice and democracy for humanity across the planet.

Finally, some civil society associations have turned global by themselves
undertaking transworld regulatory activities. That is, these organizations
have become directly involved in mechanisms to formulate, implement,
monitor and enforce global governance measures. For example, in the late
1990s hundreds of civil society associations joined with the World Bank in a
Structural Adjustment Policy Review Initiative to assess the effects of macro-
economic reforms in eight countries (SAPRI, 2004; SAPRIN, 2004). The
Ethical Trading Initiative, established in 1998 with sponsorship from the
British government, has involved 18 NGOs and 4 trade union federations.
NGO forums have often influenced the declarations and programmes of
action that emanate from UN-sponsored global issue conferences. Such
impact was especially apparent during the population meeting at Cairo in
1994, when interventions from the NGO forum were instrumental in
preserving commitments to family planning.



Globalization and Governance 221


Environmental NGOs have taken a particularly prominent part in global
governance of their issue-area (Princen and Finger, 1994; Lipschutz with
Mayer, 1996; Wapner, 1996; Newell, 2000). In 1980 the World Conservation
Union (IUCN) and the World Wide Fund for Nature collaborated with UNEP
to launch a World Conservation Strategy that developed guidelines for states.
On a similar pattern the World Resources Institute (WRI) formulated the
Tropical Forestry Action Plan in 1985 jointly with the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) and UNDP. Since 1997 Global Forest Watch
has tracked illegal logging and its impacts on local populations in ten countries
across the world. The International Council of Scientific Unions played an
important advisory role to the World Meteorological Organization and UNEP
in setting up the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 1988. The
Secretariat for the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) has worked in close cooperation with the
IUCN and the WWF. The IUCN, WRI and UNEP have jointly organized the
Biodiversity Conservation Strategy Programme.

Of course civil society interventions have also sometimes blocked global
governance initiatives, prompting some observers to speak of an ‘anti- global¬
ization movement’. For example, NGOs played an important role in thwart¬
ing negotiations in the OECD toward a Multilateral Agreement on Investment
in 1998 (Kobrin, 1998b; Henderson, 1999; Goodman, 2000; Smythe, 2000).
Civil society opposition to neoliberalist globalization has also played a part in
frustrating WTO Ministerial Conferences at Seattle in 1999 and Cancun in
2003 as well as cancelling a World Bank meeting in Barcelona in 2001
(Cockburn and St Clair, 2000; Kaldor et al., 2000; Yuen et al., 2001).
Coalitions of NGOs and grassroots groups have halted several World Bank-
funded dam constructions or obtained better compensation arrangements for
people adversely affected by these projects (Udall, 1998; Khagram, 2000).

Civil society engagement with global governance has sometimes also
reverberated back on state regulation. Employing a so-called ‘boomerang
effect’, civil society groups have worked through global arenas in pursuit of
changes to state policy (Keck and Sikkink, 1998). For example, civil society
associations in Kuwait have utilized global events and measures to press their
government to change budget allocations, economic planning, and envir¬
onmental laws. Some women’s associations in Eastern Europe and Central
Asia did not meet their country authorities until both sides attended UN
meetings on gender issues.


Conclusion

From the above (and as summarized in the box below) it is plain that glob¬
alization has significantly affected the mode of governance. In tandem with



222 Change and Continuity


this reconfiguration of social space, the statist mould of old has given way to
a polycentric framework of regulation. States continue to figure very signifi¬
cantly in this poststatist condition, but they are embedded in multi-scalar and
diffuse networks of regulation. Polycentric governance occurs through
diverse and often interconnected public and private arrangements on varying
scales from local to global. The situation has lacked a clear centre of
command and control of the sort that the Westphalian sovereign state once
provided.


Implications of globalization for governance in
summary

Refashioning of states

• removal of the material and ideational conditions for statism and
Westphalian constructions of sovereignty

• reorientation of states to serve global as well as national constituencies

• complex and differential effects on state delivery of social protections

• shifts in the incidence of warfare and the tools with which it is waged

• major growth in transstate networks

Diffusion of regulation

• widespread devolution and increased cross-border relations of substate
authorities

• proliferation and growth of macro-regional governance agencies

• expansion of public global regulation

• development of private, non-statutory frameworks to govern various
aspects of global affairs

Growth of global civil society

• rise of organized citizen activism on global issues

• increased engagement by civil society groups of suprastate and private
governance agencies as well as the state


With such a dispersion of regulatory activities, polycentric governance
involves major challenges of producing coherent and effective policy. No
single actor or committee of actors plays an overall coordinating role in, say,
the regulation of climate change, epidemics, intellectual property, the
Internet, or refugee flows. The possibilities of gaps, overlaps, confusions and
contradictions between agencies are considerable. Moreover, with no final
site of adjudication, people in a situation of polycentrism can always appeal
their case to another authority.

To take one prominent example, regulation of a global financial crisis




Globalization and Governance 223


involves governments of the countries directly affected, as well as transstate
networks like the G7, G20 and G24, as well as global agencies such as the BIS
and the IMF, as well as macro-regional institutions like the European Central
Bank, as well as private bodies with regulatory functions such as the IASB and
the International Securities Market Association, as well as civil society asso¬
ciations like the IIF and Friends of the Earth (Scholte, 2002c). Nothing like a
World Financial Authority exists to provide general oversight and coordina¬
tion. In this situation, responses to global financial crises - like in Asia in
1997-8 - have tended to be rather ad hoc and muddled. Similar comment
could be made about the governance of many other global problems.

Of course a dispersion of regulatory activities does not necessarily entail a
diffusion of power. On the contrary, as already stressed in Chapter 2, and as
further elaborated in Part III, contemporary globalization has very much
been a question of hierarchy and dominance. Decentralization in respect of
the institutions of governance has also been a context for considerable
concentration of power in certain states and social circles. As a result, today’s
globalizing world confronts critical democratic deficits, as considered at
length in Chapter 11.



Chapter 7


Globalization and Identity:
From Nationalism to
Hybridization

Main points of this chapter

Globalization and the nationality principle

Plural national identities

Nonterritorial identities

Hybridization

Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• contemporary globalization has helped to undermine the previous near-
monopolistic position of state-nations in the construction of collective
identities

• globalization has encouraged the growth of national identities on scales
other than the state, in respect of substate, macro-regional and
transworld spheres

• the spread of transplanetary relations has encouraged some rise in
universal-cosmopolitan attachments to humanity as a whole

• the growth of transworld spaces has facilitated the development of various
nonterritorial identities inter alia on lines of faith, class, gender and race

• pluralization of identities in the context of globalization has increased
tendencies of hybridization


So far this discussion of globalization and social change has interlinked struc¬
tures of space, production and governance. Socio-psychological aspects of
the dynamics are now added in the current chapter with a focus on frame¬
works of identity. Identities - that is, constructions of being, belonging and
becoming - hold key significance in terms of both defining the self and forg¬
ing collective bonds with others. Moreover, structures of identity have far-
reaching implications for resource distributions, regulatory apparatuses and
citizenship. Not surprisingly, then, identities often lie at the heart of, and give
shape to, political struggles.


224





Globalization and Identity 225


Territorialism as the previously prevailing structure of social space was
closely interlinked with nationalism as the previously prevailing structure of
collective identity. Given this relationship, the currently ongoing shift away
from territorialism in social geography has, not surprisingly, unfolded
together with an attenuation of nationalism as the overriding basis of macro
social identification. Instead of the monochrome fixation on nationality
(especially state-centred nationhood) that reigned in the mid-twentieth
century, identities in today’s more global world have tended to adopt a more
plural and hybrid character. Today faith, class, gender, race, age, sexual
orientation and other aspects of self and solidarity have acquired increased
prominence alongside - and in complex mixes with - nationality. The general
situation with respect to identity has moved from one of nationalism to one
of considerable pluralism and hybridity.

‘Nationalism’ is taken here to be a circumstance where people construct
their being, belonging and becoming first and foremost in terms of national
affiliation. Ideological nationalism - the zealous promotion of one’s nation -
is one reflection of the deeper social structure of nationalism. Other manifest¬
ations of this structure include the construction of states, firms and civil soci¬
ety associations as primarily if not exclusively national organizations, often
adorned with national symbols. In addition, under nationalist conditions
literature, music and other art forms are principally described on national
lines: ‘the American novel’, ‘Dutch painting’, etc. Although other touchstones
for identity such as class and religion exist under conditions of nationalism,
they are invariably subordinated to the overriding nationality principle, for
example, in national business confederations and national churches.

In the middle of the twentieth century, prior to accelerated and large-scale
globalization, nationalism ranked as the predominant world structure of
collective identity. Across the planet national sensibilities were either well
entrenched or, in the case of decolonizing areas, on a sharp ascent. Reflecting
these times, the theologian Reinhold Niebuhr declared that the nation was ‘the
most absolute of all human associations’ (1932: 83). On similar lines the polit¬
ical scientist Rupert Emerson in 1960 dubbed the nation ‘the terminal commun¬
ity’ that invariably prevailed ‘when the chips are down’ (1960: 95-6).

Several decades of intensified globalization and spreading supraterritori-
ality have helped to loosen the hold of nationality as the overriding basis of
group identity. National solidarity has rested in good part on a population’s
shared devotion to and struggle for a specific territorial homeland. A relative
deterritorialization of social space could therefore be expected to transpire
hand in hand with a relative denationalization of social identity. At the same
time, the general rise of supraterritorial connections might logically be
reflected in, and encouraged by, a growth of nonterritorial identities and soli¬
darities, for example, on lines of bodily condition (e.g., AIDS sufferers),
generation (e.g., teenage culture), or religion (e.g., Baha’ism).



226 Change and Continuity


This is by no means to suggest that contemporary globalization has
brought an ‘end of the national project’ in regard to identity (Smith, 1990a;
Brown, 1995; Guehenno, 1995), any more than the trend has yielded the fall
of capital in respect of production or the demise of the state in respect of
governance. Many nations survive and indeed thrive in today’s more global
world. Just as the passing of territorial/swz has not meant the passing of terri-
torial ity in the sphere of geography, so the end of nationalise has not entailed
the end of nationality in the sphere of identity. Notions of a ‘postnational’ era
would seem at best premature (Habermas, 1998; Hedetoft and Hjort, 2002;
see also Kennedy and Danks, 2001).

Rather, much as the expansion of transplanetary and supraterritorial links
between people has helped to alter various attributes of capitalist production
and state governance, so globalization has also encouraged changes in the
manifestations of national identity. For example, next to state-nations (that
is, national identities connected with a state jurisdiction), the contemporary
globalizing world has experienced a proliferation of micro-nations that reside
within and sometimes also across state jurisdictions. In addition, regionaliza¬
tion against the backdrop of globalization has promoted some development
of macro region-nations, especially in the case of European identity. And
globalization has furthered a growth of transworld national identities in
peoples like Armenians and Chinese that are dispersed in diasporas across the
planet.

At the same time as shifting the forms of nationhood, accelerated global¬
ization and the rise of supraterritorial connectivity have also encouraged
some notable growth of non-national, non-territorial collective identities
during the past half-century. For one thing, recent decades have seen modest
increases in universalistic cosmopolitanism, where people identify themselves
with a single community of all humankind that extends everywhere on earth.
In addition, other nonterritorial identities and accompanying transworld
solidarities and struggles have been based on a particular attribute that is
shared by certain persons scattered across the planet. Thus what might be
termed ‘partial cosmopolitanisms’ have developed in relation to shared faith,
class, gender, race, age, sexual orientation and disability.

These various trends in the social construction of identities in a globalizing
world have often converged on the individual. That is, the same person might
experience several identities at once, with a mix of state-nationalities, micro¬
nationalities, region-nationalities, global diasporas, and nonterritorial iden¬
tities. Indeed, few people living more globalized lives have a one-dimensional
identity of the old nationalist sort. Globalization has tended to generate
hybridity, where persons have complex multifaceted identities and face chal¬
lenges of negotiating a blend of sometimes conflicting modes of being and
belonging within the same self.

The rest of this chapter elaborates these implications of contemporary



Globalization and Identity 227


globalization for identity in turn. The first section considers the general rela¬
tionship between globalization and the nationality principle. The second
section examines the proliferation of different kinds of national projects
under contemporary intensified globalization, including micro-nations,
region-nations and transworld nations in addition to traditional state-
nations. The third section explores connections between globalization and
the growth of nonterritorial identities. The fourth section analyses the
dynamics of hybridization within globalization.


Globalization and the nationality principle

Before further elaborating how accelerated globalization of recent history has
affected national identities it is advisable to consider what constitutes a
nation. This is not to attempt (fruitlessly) a resolution of long-running,
complicated and often heated debates about defining nationality. However,
for the purpose of the present discussion nationhood may be said to exhibit
four general distinguishing features.

First, a nation encompasses a large population. Its size is substantial
enough that each member has face-to-face contacts with only a minor
proportion of the total national group. Nations are thereby distinguished
from smaller-scale affiliations like neighbourhoods and traditional kinship
circles whose members have regular direct interactions with one another.

Second, a nation is distinguished as a form of collective identity by attach¬
ment to a specific territorial homeland, which usually has larger proportions
than a district or province. Each nation roots itself in a particular country,
even if (as in the case of certain diasporas) a majority of the group resides
outside that domain. In some instances, two or more national projects have
laid claim to the same tract of land. As a result, long and bitter nationalist
conflicts have developed over, for example, Kashmir and Northern Ireland.

Third, a nation defines itself through an emphasis of attributes that set it
apart from other national groups. Each nation declares itself to be unique on
the basis of difference. These distinguishing features may relate to language,
customs, sensibilities, art forms, religion, race or more. Nationalists generally
connect these marks of distinction to a shared heritage in the past, a joint
struggle in the present, and/or a common destiny in the future.

Fourth, as previously noted in Chapter 4, nations are mutually constitutive.
They do not arise autonomously, but through inter-national relations. Thus a
nation identifies its purportedly unique characteristics largely by drawing
contrasts with ‘foreigners’. In addition, nations have usually forged and
sustained themselves in good part through acts of collective defence against
‘external’ intrusions such as military attacks or colonial domination. At the
same time, nations have tended to consolidate in part by asserting privileges



228 Change and Continuity


(like citizenship and welfare entitlements) for ‘insiders’ that are denied to
‘outsiders’. On each of these counts, nationality and inter-nationality have
been two sides of the same coin.

Some might add statehood (including the aspiration to statehood) as a fifth
distinguishing feature of nationhood; however, states and nations are far
from the same. A nation is a type of group identity, while a state is a type of
governance apparatus. A nation-state is a territorial government that means
to rule over a corresponding national homeland. A state-nation is a territor¬
ial community that means to be ruled by a corresponding state apparatus.
However, many states are not nation-states (e.g., city-states and multina¬
tional states like the Austro-Hungarian Empire). Likewise, many nations are
not state-nations (e.g., the micro-nations and region-nations discussed later
in this chapter).

True, historically the governance structure of statism and the identity
structure of nationalism have often had close interconnections. The main
form of national identity between the mid-nineteenth and mid-twentieth
centuries was the state-nation. Thus the Brazilian nation was linked with the
Brazilian state, the German nation with the German state, the emergent
Indonesian nation with the emergent Indonesian state, and so on. Notions of
‘nation’ and ‘state’ were so tightly interwoven in this earlier day that many
people treated the two notions as synonymous (for example, saying ‘interna¬
tional’ relations when they meant ‘inter-state’ relations). Indeed, to this day
many people conflate the terms ‘citizenship’ and ‘nationality’, even though
the words refer to different issues of governance and identity, respectively.

Yet nations can also take non-state forms. Many large groupings of people
that claim distinctive collective attributes and attachment to a territorial
homeland lack a corresponding state. Examples include substate nations like
Luo and Quebecois, transstate nations like Basques and Kurds, and globally
dispersed nations like Africans and Palestinians. Indeed, as later parts of this
chapter elaborate, one of the significant consequences of contemporary
heightened globalization has been to loosen the connections between states
and nations, including to the point that many national projects today no
longer involve an aspiration to acquire their own sovereign state.

Although nationalists usually affirm that their identities are primordial
and natural, national projects on the lines just described were not consoli¬
dated anywhere on earth until well into the nineteenth century. Only then did
a fully fledged national sensibility emerge: deeply rooted in consciousness;
spread across all provinces in a country; enveloping all classes and religions in
a population; and central to political organization and aspirations. Even in
France, often depicted as the birthplace of the national idea, social conscious¬
ness was not comprehensively ‘nationalized’ until the late nineteenth century
(Weber, 1977). Indeed, viewed in the long term of history, national unity has
been an aberration rather than the norm (McNeill, 1986).



Globalization and Identity 229


If nationalism is a historically bound social structure, might contemporary
globalization - with its expansion of supraterritorial spaces and growth of
planetary connections - herald the end of the national identities? In certain
ways, globalization has unsettled and indeed challenged the position of the
nation as the predominant touchstone of collective identity in society. As is
elaborated later in this chapter, the spread of transworld relations has
promoted a rise of nonterritorial identities and cosmopolitan solidarities.
Given this increased plurality of group affiliations, appeals to an overriding
state-bound ‘national interest’ today generally fall on less steady ground than
they did in the first half of the twentieth century.

In addition, globalization has disrupted several aspects of social structure
that have in the past encouraged the development of nations. For example,
nationalism has historically thrived in the context of territorially based
commercial and industrial capitalism. However, as indicated in Chapter 5,
globalization has shifted the scope of accumulation to include commodities
that are much less tied to territorial geography. Moreover, most major
national projects have historically developed in the context of territorial
states. States sponsored the language, symbols, education systems, infra¬
structure and wars that were crucial to the creation of nations. Yet trends in
governance described in Chapter 6 (with the move from statism to polycen¬
trism) have attenuated the dynamics that previously bolstered state-nations.
Indeed, European governance institutions have promoted a suprastate
European identity, while global governance agencies have often advanced
notions of a cosmopolitan ‘international community’.

In experiences of daily life, too, globalization has made the question of
national distinctiveness still more problematic than it has always to some
extent been. The growth of transworld relations has greatly intensified the
interpenetration of languages, customs, artefacts, races and other purported
hallmarks of ‘unique’ national character. As a result, it has often become
more difficult clearly and precisely to distinguish nations from one another.

But do such tensions between globalization and nationalism mean that
national identities have no future? Little evidence points to so radical a conclu¬
sion. After all, many of the circumstances that have historically encouraged the
growth of national affiliations have persisted in the midst of contemporary
intense globalization. As stressed before, older territorially bound commerce
and industry have not disappeared with the rise of global capitalism. Similarly,
states have shown no sign of becoming irrelevant, even if they have lost their
earlier monopoly on governance. Meanwhile entrenched national languages,
national festivals, national transportation infrastructures, national histori¬
ographies, national legal systems, national statistics, national medical styles,
national academic traditions, and so forth hardly seem likely to disappear in
the short or even medium term. The discourse of nationality has remained
prominent in global governance agencies such as the United Nations and the



230 Change and Continuity


Inter-national Monetary Fund. Many a transworld women’s organizer,
global company manager, and supraterritorial religious revivalist has
retained at least a secondary national self-definition along with their nonter¬
ritorial identity.

Moreover, current accelerated globalization has in some ways positively
reinforced national sensibilities. For instance, price structures of telecommu¬
nications have generally been set so that ‘domestic’ calls within the nation
cost much less than ‘foreign’ calls over a similar distance (albeit that such cost
differentials have substantially declined of late in many countries). In addi¬
tion, electronic mass media can be harnessed in the service of a national
project, as wartime propaganda has illustrated for decades. Newspaper
websites mainly attract readers (including expatriates) from the nation where
the respective journals are based. Global broadcasters like CNN
International draw tiny audiences relative to national channels in most parts
of the world most of the time. Nationalist pride has put much impetus behind
the entry of flag-carrying companies into global capitalism. Korean corporate
conglomerates, the chaebols, present a clear example in this regard. Global
tournaments like the Olympic Games and various World Cups have also
thrived on nationalist sentiment.

Indeed, increased contact with the ‘foreigner’ through global connectivity
has in many cases heightened rather than reduced awareness of, dedication
to, and determination to preserve national distinctiveness. Although the
growth of transworld spaces can in some ways blur national differences,
closer inter-national encounters in global markets, global media and the like
can also sharpen self-awareness of national identity. Many a global tourist is
only too glad to get back to their national home!

Moreover, by removing the protection previously afforded by territorial
distance and borders, the rise of supraterritoriality has sometimes prompted
nationalist reactions. Adopting a rejectionist position of the sort described in
Chapter 1, many people have feared that global capital destroys national
jobs, that global communications threaten national cultures, that global
governance undermines national self-determination, that global ecology
endangers national health. These fears have provoked many a defensive move
to preserve national identities. For example, contemporary times of acceler¬
ated globalization have seen widespread calls for trade protectionism and
tighter immigration controls. Many parts of Europe have experienced
revivals of xenophobic nationalism, witnessed inter alia in the electoral
advances of the Freedom Party in Austria, the Flemish Bloc in Belgium, the
National Front in France, the Progress Party in Norway, and the Greater
Romania Party. In Australia the One Nation party briefly flourished in the
late 1990s. Meanwhile one White House aspirant of the 1990s, Patrick
Buchanan, urged ‘cultural war’ and the construction of an impenetrable
2,000-mile steel fence along the US border with Mexico, allegedly to protect



Globalization and Identity 231


the American worker from the ills of globalization (Buchanan, 1998). Thus
deepening transworld connectivity has in some quarters provoked greater
determination to retain national identities. In these circles, the more that
territorial distances and borders have disintegrated, the more national differ¬
ences have seemed precious.


Plural national identities

Although, owing to the logics just described, contemporary intensified glob¬
alization has not heralded the end of national identities, the reconfiguration
of geography has affected the forms that nationhood takes. On a broad
pattern seen previously with respect to capital and the state, the growth of
transplanetary connections has wrought change-within-continuity as regards
the nation. That is, the general feature of nationhood has remained, but its
specific manifestations have altered in important ways. In particular, the
globalizing world has witnessed a pluralization of national identities. Instead
of the previous effective monopoly of state-nations, national identities have
come increasingly to take substate, transstate and suprastate forms as well.
Indeed, many individuals have acquired a plurinational sense of self.


The persistence of state-nations

As already implied in earlier paragraphs, many state-nations have proved to
be quite resilient under contemporary conditions of accelerated globaliza¬
tion. For instance, the spread of transworld relations apparently did nothing
to reduce the urgency with which the Bonn/Berlin government sponsored
German national reunification under an enlarged German state after 1989.
Likewise, most of the new post-communist states in Central Asia and Eastern
Europe (Kazakstan, Slovenia, etc.) have enthusiastically sought to forge a
national community that matches their territorial jurisdiction. Elsewhere in
the South, large-scale globalization has not deterred most newly decolonized
states from pursuing strategies of nation-building in respect of their popula¬
tions (albeit with mixed records of success).

Moreover, state-nations old and new have often actively reaffirmed their
cultural distinctiveness in the face of intensified globalization. For example,
governments in France, Iceland, the Philippines and Russia have taken
measures to counter the encroachments of global English on their respective
national languages. Meanwhile in the 1980s the Thatcher government in the
UK reformed the school curriculum with a specific goal of giving greater
emphasis to British history. Steps in recent decades to deepen the European
Union have also often reinvigorated state-nationalist sentiments, with elec¬
torates in several member countries using popular referenda to block



232 Change and Continuity


advances in that regionalist project. In this vein Danes at first rejected the
Maastricht Treaty in 1993, and Swedes refused the euro ten years later.
Several national electorates may well soon turn down the proposed EU
constitution.

Some governments have taken steps to reduce global flows in an effort to
preserve state-national identities. For example, authorities in China,
Malaysia, Saudi Arabia and elsewhere have at one time or another outlawed
‘foreign’ satellite broadcasts into their respective countries. Other regimes
have adopted different technical standards for satellite television in the hope
of repelling this ‘invasion’ (Webster, 1984: 1172). In the 1970s and 1980s,
states of the South led an (unsuccessful) drive for a New World Information
and Communications Order (NWICO) that aimed among other things to
enhance national control over mass communications and to give greater
national character to the communicated material. In Hanoi the government
passed rules in 1995 to enhance the ‘Vietnamese’ nature of advertising. The
next year police dismantled various billboards promoting ‘foreign’ goods in a
campaign of ‘protection against poisonous cultural items’ (FT, 2 February
1996: 14).

In other cases governments have sought to harness forces of globalization
in the service of a state-nation project. For example, state-sponsored airlines
(now largely privatized) have in the past stimulated considerable national
pride in many countries. Meanwhile state-owned and state-regulated elec¬
tronic mass media have often promoted national consciousness through their
news and entertainment programmes. The Globo network in Brazil and the
Televisa group in Mexico have helped to advance state-national identity via
television in those two countries. The governments of India and Indonesia
have used satellite broadcasting to the same end (Ploman, 1984:102-3,121).
States have furthermore often sponsored national pavilions at World Fairs
and national teams in global sports competitions. The African National
Congress (ANC) and the Revolutionary Front of an Independent East Timor
(Fretilin) have used global governance agencies to considerable effect in their
struggles to gain a state for their respective national projects.

All of this said, however, globalization has in other important respects
tended to weaken state-nations. For one thing, as elaborated below, the trend
has promoted the growth of alternative frameworks of collective identity,
both national and nonterritorial. In addition, the rise of transplanetary
connections has compromised the state’s previous capacity to dominate the
construction of nations. For example, under prevailing neoliberalist policies,
the globalization of capital has made it next to impossible for states to expro¬
priate enterprises in the purported ‘national interest’. Through privatization
under neoliberalist globalization, a much smaller proportion of communica¬
tions networks (crucial to the formation of cultural bonds) are today owned
and operated by the state. With the growth of transworld relations, money



Globalization and Identity 233


has come to involve much more than state-sponsored national currency. In
short, the state in a more globalized world is unable to control many of the
circumstances that spawn and sustain group solidarities.

Some of the alternative collective identities that have developed in this situ¬
ation are also nations, but national associations that do not correspond to an
existing state. These groupings have all of the distinguishing features of a
nation, namely, large population, attachment to a territorial homeland,
emphasis of cultural distinctiveness, and international reciprocal identifica¬
tion. However, these nations are not connected to a sponsoring state - and in
many cases do not aspire to old-style sovereign statehood either.

The rise of micro-nations

Hundreds of national identities in the contemporary globalizing world have
operated on a smaller scale than traditional state-nations. Many of these
micro-nations like the Flemish in Belgium and the Kikuyu in Kenya have lain
within a single state jurisdiction. However, others like the Baluchis in West
Asia, the Tutsis in Central Africa, and the Roma in Central Europe have
resided across several states. Some micro-national movements have sought
secession from an existing state in order to create their own nation-state. Yet
other campaigns have parted from traditional nationalist strategies and have
instead aimed for greater national autonomy within and across established
states (Keating, 2001).

Contemporary micro-nations take several forms. So-called ‘indigenous
peoples’ or ‘aborigines’ group the descendants of the original human inhabi¬
tants of subsequently conquered territories. Examples include Amerindians
in Amazonia, Aboriginals in Australasia, Tribals in the Indian Subcontinent,
Bushpeople in the Kalahari, First Nations in North America, and Saami in
Scandinavia. Micro-nations also include other sub- and transstate peoples
who have felt alienated from and/or marginalized by established states.
Examples include Corsicans in France, Ibo in Nigeria, Quebecois in Canada,
Tamils in Sri Lanka, and Tibetans in China.

Certain micro-nationalist strivings for recognition and autonomy
appeared as early as the end of the nineteenth century. Examples include the
Acehnese, the Basques, the Catalans, and the Scots (Smith, 1995: 52).
However, most micro-national movements have grown more recently. True,
like state-nationalists, micro-nationalists have usually affirmed that their
identity derives from some age-old primordial essence. However, in most
cases full-scale efforts to forge a micro-national identity have been new to the
past half-century. One source has counted, as of 1990, over 800 micro¬
nationalist movements in a world of fewer than 200 states (Falk, 1992: 202;
see also Halperin and Scheffer, 1992).

Micro-nationalist campaigns have booked a number of advances in recent



234 Change and Continuity


decades, including the segmentation of several states. In some instances (such
as the former Czechoslovakia, Soviet Union and Yugoslavia) the division has
gained recognition in international law. In other cases (such as Cyprus and
Sudan) de facto splits have developed. Micro-nationalist resistances have also
stimulated major constitutional reforms without state fragmentation in Spain
(1978), Lebanon (1990), and Belgium (1993). Aboriginal peoples have
gained greater statutory protection of their identities within existing states in
Australia, Brazil, Canada, New Zealand and Scandinavia. The post¬
apartheid government of South Africa has declared eleven languages to be
official.

Yet, striking though recent advances of micro-nations may be, the trend
has in important respects not marked a transformation of underlying struc¬
tures of identity. ‘Tribes’, ‘ethnic groups’, ‘indigenous peoples’ and ‘national
minorities’ have only redrawn the map of nations. These collective identities
have not contradicted the nationality principle as such. Like state-nations,
micro-nations involve sizeable populations. With the exception of nomadic
peoples, micro-nations are devoted to a fixed territorial place. Like state-
nations, micro-nations identify themselves by highlighting their purportedly
unique attributes. Following another well-known pattern, micro-nations
establish their identity and solidarity largely through processes of inter¬
national ‘othering’: some of it defensive and some of it aggressively exclu¬
sionary. In short, micro-national movements have not challenged the
principle of nationhood, but rather have reproduced it in new forms. Most
significantly, the spread of micro-nations in today’s world has often loosened
the connection between nation and state, a development that in turn has
promoted greater pluralism in identities.

Globalization has encouraged the growth of micro-nations in three
general ways. First, to draw again on a major previous point, globalization
has reduced the relative power of the state, decreasing its capacity to forge a
single united nation to the exclusion of other identities. The retreat of statism
has opened new regulatory venues including devolved government and
suprastate institutions through which micro-nations can advance their
autonomy. Moreover, in some countries micro-nationalism has partly
entailed a reaction against the state’s service of supraterritorial constituents.
For example, protests at collaborative interventions between the Nigerian
state and Royal Dutch/Shell have spurred the Ogoni movement in the Niger
Delta. In such cases micro-nationality has emerged as a form of identity that
promises to fulfil collective needs in a more global world better than the state-
nation. Such a dynamic has also unfolded among, for example, the Moros,
the Quebecois and the Scots in their struggles with the Philippine, Canadian
and British states, respectively.

Second, micro-national movements (especially indigenous peoples’
campaigns) have on various occasions exploited transworld relations to



Globalization and Identity 235


advance their causes (Wilmer, 1993; Brysk, 2000). Representatives of differ¬
ent aboriginal groups have met together in global gatherings since the mid-
1970s. On a more regular basis, too, air, telephone and Internet have
allowed, for example, the Navajo in the USA to aid the Saami in Scandinavia
and the Cree in Canada to assist the Miskito in Central America. Indigenous
peoples have also created their own ‘multilateral institutions’. On a regional
scale the Inuit Circumpolar Conference (ICC), formed in 1977, has linked
this aboriginal group across Alaska, Canada, Chukotka (Russia), and
Greenland. On a transworld scale the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples
Organization (UNPO) has since its creation in 1991 furthered the causes of
more than 50 member communities (UNPO, 1995). In official circles, mean¬
while, United Nations bodies have promoted the recent codification of
indigenous peoples’ rights in suprastate law (Anaya, 1996). The UN also
declared 1993 to be the International Year of the World’s Indigenous People.
Concurrently, publicity via the global mass media has helped to generate
transworld support for aboriginal movements like the Zapatistas of Chiapas
State in Mexico and the Free Papua Organization (Organisasi Papua
Merdeka, OPM) in Indonesia (Olesen, 2002).

Third, globalization has encouraged the growth of micro-national move¬
ments in a reactive sense. Thus, much as the rise of globality has reinvigor¬
ated the defensive dynamic of some state-nations, so it has also sometimes
fuelled self-protective resistance in micro-nations. In this vein a Quebecois
trade unionist has affirmed that ‘our values and distinctiveness are very
important to us. We don’t want globalization in the sense of a culture-
grinder of uniformization’ (St-Denis, 2002). Global tourism has intensified
aboriginal Hawaiian sensibilities. Global deforestation has spurred indige¬
nous activism in Amazonia. More generally, too, global ecological degrada¬
tion has given indigenous peoples occasion to assert the worth of their
alternative ways of engaging with nature. The activation of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) at the beginning of 1994
provided the immediate trigger for the Zapatista rebellion. In these and
other cases, micro-nationalism has held out a promise of cultural integrity
and political autonomy through smaller communities, against fears of
homogenizing tendencies and externally imposed rule in globalization.

To be sure, globalization has not been the only force behind the contemp¬
orary upsurge in micro-national movements. Circumstances connected with
particular countries and localities have also determined whether, when, and
in what form micro-nationalist strivings have emerged. Indeed, globalization
seems to have played a lesser role in some of these campaigns, such as the
long-running struggles of various hill peoples in South Asia. On the whole,
however, the rise of transworld connectivity has figured significantly in
making micro-nationalism a major force of contemporary politics.



236 Change and Continuity


The emergence of region-nations

Whereas the micro-nationalist campaigns just described have sought to build
national identities and communities on a scale smaller than the state, region-
alist projects have developed ideas of nationhood ‘above’ the state. These
macro-nationalisms have included Pan-African, Pan-Arab, Pan-Asian, Pan-
European, and Pan-Turkish movements. Often such strivings have enjoyed
collective state sponsorship through, for example, the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the Council of Europe, and the European Union.

Proponents of region-nations have usually linked these putative collective
identities to a common heritage that stretches far into the past. Shared exper¬
iences like the slave trade, Islam, Christendom or the Ottoman Empire are
said to provide deep historical roots for present-day solidarity. The categories
‘African’, ‘Arab’, ‘Asian’ and ‘European’ became deeply institutionalized
under colonialism of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Yet
strivings to foster collective identities linked to a suprastate region are mainly
a recent phenomenon. Some modest manifestations of Pan-Africanism
appeared as early as the 1890s, albeit more on racial than regional grounds.
Various associations to promote European unity emerged between the two
world wars. However, the principal rise of macro-nations on a regional scale
has occurred since the second half of the twentieth century, concurrently with
and often aided by accelerated globalization.

On the whole, region-nations have so far made more limited advances
than micro-national identities. For example, the Pan-Asian movement stalled
after several conferences in the 1940s. (However, the last years of the twenti¬
eth century saw some determined assertions of ‘Asian values’ in economic
development, especially with respect to human rights.) Perpetual quarrels
among Arab governments have severely hampered the development of that
region-nation. Notions of an African identity have enjoyed widespread popu¬
lar currency across that continent. Since 1983 a Pan African News Agency
(PANA) has attempted to assert an autonomous regional voice in global jour¬
nalism. However, on the whole Africanist sentiments have to date produced
little in the way of sustained and focused campaigns for a deeper and more
institutionalized transcontinental identity. Pan-Turkism grew following the
disintegration of the Soviet Union, but has thus far not developed beyond a
vague aspiration. Meanwhile most other regionalist schemes (for example, in
Central America, South Asia and elsewhere) have been primarily commercial
projects with little if any accompanying drive to deepen identity bonds across
the populations of the participating countries.

By comparison, European regional organizations (especially the Council
of Europe and the EU) have done most to promote a common identity along¬
side a common market. European symbols and experiences now abound in
daily life around this macro-region. Article 8 of the 1992 Maastricht Treaty



Globalization and Identity 237


even formalized an institution of EU citizenship. The idea of a European
collective solidarity has gained considerable hold among some elites and
younger generations in the EU. However, commitment to a region-nation
remains pretty shallow in the hearts and minds of many residents of Europe
today.

These limitations noted, region-nations have nevertheless figured more
prominently in contemporary world culture than in earlier times and could
well show further growth in years to come. Globalization has not been the
sole impulse for this rise, but it has encouraged the trend. The connections
between the two developments have followed broadly the same lines that
were previously mentioned in regard to micro-nations. Namely, globaliza¬
tion has: (a) ended statism and thereby enhanced opportunities for the
growth of suprastate identities like region-nations; (b) supplied important
means of communication and organization for building macro-regional iden¬
tities; and (c) provoked nationalist reactions, in this case on a macro-regional
rather than a country or more local scale. The spurs that globalization has
given to regional governance institutions (discussed in Chapter 6) have also
furthered the growth of corresponding regional identities.

Like micro-nations, region-nations have proved to be nations in an alter¬
native guise rather than a qualitatively different form of identity. The various
‘Pan’ movements have all shown the four broad distinguishing features of
nationhood: that is, large population; attachment to a specific territory; stress
on cultural uniqueness; and inside-outside differentiation. Hence in respect
of region-nations, too, globalization has brought changes in rather than
changes of the national framework of identity in contemporary society.


The growth of transworld nations

In addition to state-nations, micro-nations and region-nations, the national¬
ity principle has persisted in contemporary society in the form of nations that
have dispersed across the planet. Joel Kotkin has called these diasporas
‘global tribes’ (Kotkin, 1992). Others have spoken of ‘deterritorialized
nations’ and ‘long-distance nationalism’ (Anderson, 1992; Basch et al.,
1994). In this vein, for example, Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President of Haiti
declared that his country existed wherever on earth there were Haitians
(Glick Schiller and Fouron, 1999: 354; 2001). Other prominent examples of
transworld nations include Africans, Armenians, Chinese, Indians, Jews,
Lebanese, Palestinians and Sikhs (Cohen, 1997). On a smaller scale, shared
national identities have also bonded transworld networks of Ghanaian
traders, Filipina domestics, Chilean exiles, and other migrants (Rex, 1998).

In the nineteenth century, many immigrants continued for several
generations after arrival in the new country to embrace the national identity
associated with their previous homeland. Often these groups lived in



238 Change and Continuity


distinct neighbourhoods, segregated from (and often subordinated by) the
population at large in a ‘Chinatown’ or ‘Little Italy’. Yet territorial distance
and borders also separated these immigrant communities from their national
roots. Hence their bonds with the homeland often lay mainly in the imagina¬
tion rather than in regular concrete interactions. In these circumstances the
experiences of, for example, Africans, African-Americans and Afro-
Caribbeans substantially diverged. Likewise, the Ashkenazy (European),
Falasha (Ethiopian), and Sephardic (Middle Eastern) Jews developed signifi¬
cantly different cultures during their centuries of isolation from one another.
Today’s descendants of nineteenth-century immigrants to the Americas have
little specific shared experience with their supposed co-nationals in the old
country.

In contrast, large-scale globalization of recent times has greatly enhanced
the capacities of transworld nations to sustain substantial contacts. Mass air
travel has enabled many members of a diaspora to make regular transworld
visits to one another. Supraterritorial communications such as direct-dial
telephony and satellite television have permitted close day-to-day inter¬
changes within a global nation. For instance, television reports in the early
1990s reconnected the 250,000 ethnic Koreans living in Uzbekistan with
‘compatriots’ in East Asia who had all but forgotten them.

Meanwhile Internet connections can help to sustain collective identities
among immigrants with a common national origin. Examples include the
Vietnet listserv (linking the transplanetary Vietnamese diaspora) and the
Nikkei Nexus website (linking associations of persons of Japanese ancestry
across the world) (My Vuong, 1999). As another website has put the more
general point, ‘people speaking the same language form their own online
community no matter what country they happen to live in’ (Global Reach,
2004a).

Transplanetary finance has made it easier for families and other circles
within a global nation to give each other pecuniary support. For example,
funding from expatriates in Britain, Canada and the USA has supported Sikh
activism in the Punjab. Meanwhile global markets have brought ‘home’
goods within easy reach of expatriates worldwide, enabling them more easily
to sustain their national cuisine, national dress and national festivals.

Global organizations have given some transworld nations an institutional
basis. For instance, the World Union of Free Romanians, active in the period
1984-96, and the World Romanian Council, founded in 2000, have linked
the global Romanian diaspora. The California-based International Basque
Organization for Human Rights, founded in 2003, has served to bring
together that global nation. A number of governments - including those of
Brazil, China, Mexico and Portugal - have promoted the development of
community abroad associations. Since 1995 an Agence de la Francophonie
has linked 50 states in the transworld promotion of French language and



Globalization and Identity 239


culture. For its part the Commonwealth with 53 state members has advanced
a transworld Anglophone identity through professional associations, cultural
festivals, and sports like cricket and rugby (Shaw, 2004).

In recognition of the global mobility of significant sectors of their subjects,
some states have recently increased the scope for dual citizenship. In cases like
Turkey and the USA the change has been enacted with legal directives. In
many other instances officials have turned a blind eye to statutory offences of
holding more than one passport. True, as part of its general turn from the
Commonwealth towards the European Union, the British state has during the
period of accelerated globalization narrowed the possibilities of dual citizen¬
ship vis-a-vis former colonial populations. However, on the whole govern¬
ments have (at least implicitly) acknowledged that they can no longer demand
that all their subjects hold only one exclusive national affiliation and loyalty.

In sum, then, the relationship between globalization and national identi¬
ties has shown several contrary tendencies. In some ways transworld rela¬
tions have contradicted the nationality principle, but in other ways they have
reinforced it. On no account has the rise of transplanetary and supraterritor-
ial relations spelled the end of national identities; however, nations in
contemporary globalizing times have been different from those of earlier
generations. In particular, the state-nation framework has become less domi¬
nant as a specific kind of nation, and globalization has encouraged a diversi¬
fication of types of nations to include also micro-nations, region-nations and
transworld nations.


Nonterritorial identities

The pluralization of identities under contemporary globalization becomes
still greater when the growth of various nonterritorial affiliations is added to
the diversification of national bonds discussed above. Whereas national iden¬
tities involve attachment to a particular homeland, other aspects of being
such as age, bodily condition, class, faith, gender, profession, race, sexual
orientation, and belonging to the human species itself are not bound to terri¬
torial location. A blind person’s visual impairment is not place-specific and is
a struggle shared with similarly disabled people the world over. A religious
person’s faith applies wherever they might be and provides a basis for trans¬
planetary solidarity with co-believers. Likewise, women, peasants, people of
colour, teenagers, engineers and sexual minorities have core aspects of iden¬
tity that lack a territorial referent and link them with others anywhere on the
globe. Humanity, too, is a supraterritorial, transworld category of identity.

As might be expected, accelerated growth of global relations during the
past half-century has gone hand in hand with a growth in transplanetary
identities. In the words of Zdravko Mlinar, globalization has radically altered



240 Change and Continuity


experiences of proximity and social connectedness, shaking ‘traditional terri¬
torial identities based on contiguity, homogeneity, and clearly (physically and
socially) identifiable borders’ (1992:1, his emphases; also Shapiro and Alker,
1996). For Nicholas Negroponte, the currently emergent more global gener¬
ation of children is ‘released from the limitation of geographic proximity as
the sole basis of friendship, collaboration, play, and neighborhood’ (1995:
230).

To be sure, nonterritorial affiliations existed prior to contemporary large-
scale globalization. For example, as noted in Chapter 3, adherents of the
world religions have for centuries affirmed a notional unity with their co¬
believers everywhere, even though these long-distance communities usually
in practice never had regular direct contacts with one another. For centuries
a number of political theorists have advanced notions of a cosmopolitan
unity of humankind (Carter, 2001: pt 1). Transworld solidarities among
workers, women, and people of colour gained some following in the late nine¬
teenth and early twentieth centuries. In addition, several global associations
of students and other young people were active in the first half of the twenti¬
eth century.

However, large-scale globalization since the middle of the twentieth
century has spurred unprecedented growth in nonterritorial identities and
associated networks of solidarity and struggle. Supraterritorial affiliations
now touch more people more regularly and more intensely than ever. As
transworld spaces have spread, more persons have placed important aspects
of their social bonds in nonterritorial as well as (and to some extent instead
of) territorial groupings.

This is not to suggest that people holding a nonterritorial identity are all
the same, any more than to presume that people sharing a national identity
are uniform. On the contrary, nonterritorial groupings have, like nations, in
practice housed considerable diversity and tension. Thus, for example, claims
of cultural specificity have often complicated the discourse of human rights.
Local and national loyalties have frequently frustrated the development of
transworld class solidarity. Global gender politics have spawned multiple
feminisms, including liberal, socialist, black, pacifist, radical and ecological
strands. Indeed, some parts of transworld women’s movements have rejected
the ‘feminist’ label altogether. Considerable diversity and various internecine
disputes have also marked transworld networks among sexual minorities.
That said, identity can house diversity, and differences can coexist with
solidarity.

Keeping in mind these qualifications concerning history and diversity, the
following paragraphs trace the rise of various nonterritorial identities in the
context of - and partly as a result of - accelerated globalization of the past
half-century. The growth of universalistic self-identifications with humanity
as a whole is examined first. Thereafter the growth of a number of ‘partial



Globalization and Identity 241


cosmopolitanisms’ linked with nonterritorial social positions like faith and
gender is considered.


Humanity

The most encompassing nonterritorial identity for people relates to their
species, to their human-ness. Contemporary globalization does seem to have
increased conceptions of ‘our own kind’ in terms of humanity as a whole.
Growing transplanetary connections have given people unprecedented
degrees of intimacy with one another as human beings, wherever on earth
they might be. Global products, global organizations, global broadcasts,
global monies and global symbols (like photographs of Earth from outer
space) have given people across the planet common reference points as never
before. As Anthony Giddens has observed, with heightened globalization
‘humankind in some respects becomes a “we”, facing problems and opportu¬
nities where there are no “others” ’ (1991: 27).

Increased self-identification as ‘human’ - with bonds and responsibilities
to other humans anywhere on the planet - is evident in widespread references
to a ‘global village’ and the ‘world community’, phrases that were rarely if
ever heard 50 years ago. As a priest in the Russian Orthodox Church has put
it, ‘Our world today is like a communal flat in Soviet times. We must live
together, be tolerant, do something together’ (Tchistiakov, 2002). Similar
perceptions have spurred a burgeoning academic literature on cosmopoli¬
tanism over the past decade (Held, 1995a; Nussbaum et al., 1996; Archibugi,
1998; Cheah and Robbins, 1998; Linklater, 1998; Jones, 1999; Robbins,
1999; C. Brown, 2001; Featherstone etal., 2002; Singer, 2002; Vertovec and
Cohen, 2002). Increasingly, there is a sense that, in important respects, the
situation of human beings anywhere in the world concerns human beings
everywhere in the world and that some global challenges are common human
struggles. To be sure, the extent of self-identification with a global humanity
must not be exaggerated, but these sentiments have certainly grown relative
to previous generations.

One prominent area where globalization has increased awareness of
bonds with humanity as a whole is the environment. Climate change, strato¬
spheric ozone depletion, biodiversity loss, planet Earth’s possible collisions
with comets, and the like affect humanity as such. No nation, class, gender,
race or other social category is exempted. Global ecological degradation has
prompted the creation of a number of transworld associations and campaigns
(Greenpeace, WWF, etc.) whose members work together for the (supposed)
good of humankind as a whole. Likewise, many have accepted the principle
that a ‘human interest’ above and beyond national and sectoral interests
requires increased global governance of transworld ecological problems. To
be sure, the distribution of the costs of environmental repair remains a matter



242 Change and Continuity


of considerable political contention, but the fact of humanity’s shared ecolog¬
ical fate is broadly accepted.

The growth of global relief campaigns provides further evidence of
increased nonterritorial self-identification with the transplanetary human
species. Wars, famines, epidemics and natural disasters have since the mid¬
twentieth century elicited transworld assistance with much greater frequency
and on a much larger scale than in earlier times. The aid is tellingly charac¬
terized as ‘humanitarian’, i.e., it is extended on the basis of shared identity as
human beings. Global mass media in particular have often played a key role
in mobilizing the so-called ‘world community’ to provide emergency relief. In
July 1985, for example, satellite transmissions brought the Live Aid pop
concerts simultaneously to half the countries of the world and yielded almost
$4 billion in donations for 20 drought-stricken countries of Africa. Likewise
eliminating distance between the self and the suffering other, television
pictures of the Indian Ocean tsunami of 26 December 2004 provoked a trans¬
planetary response that was absent following the devastating Krakatoa erup¬
tion in the same region 120 years earlier. In the contemporary more global
world, as the philosopher Peter Singer has declared, ‘it makes no moral differ¬
ence whether the person I help is a neighbor’s child ten yards from me or a
Bengali whose name I shall never know, ten thousand miles away’ (1972:
231-2).

In some cases self-identification with humanity has legitimated military
engagements. Several so-called ‘humanitarian interventions’ took place in the
context of the nineteenth-century Concert of Europe, but the practice is
mainly recent (Wheeler, 2000; Coker, 2001). However tardy and inadequate
in many cases, the frequency and scale of contemporary humanitarian inter¬
ventions is unprecedented: in Cambodia, Haiti, East Timor, ‘safe havens’ for
Kurds in Iraq, Somalia, Bosnia, Rwanda, Kosovo, Sierra Leone, and so on.
Against this backdrop one might speak of a new genre of ‘cosmopolitan mili¬
taries’ (Elliott and Cheeseman, 2004).

Collective solidarity with fellow human beings anywhere on earth has also
motivated substantial peace movements since the middle of the twentieth
century. As noted in Chapter 3, protests against war and militarization united
people from multiple countries on several occasions in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. However, the size and global spread of these previ¬
ous initiatives did not match the scope of contemporary mobilizations for
peace. Examples of these struggles include transworld campaigns against
nuclear weapons since the 1950s (with a peak in the early 1980s) and against
US military intervention in Indochina in the 1960s. Most recently, large-scale
opposition to the harm inflicted on human beings through warfare was
evident on 15 February 2003 with demonstrations by anywhere from 5 to 30
million people in 600 cities in 60 countries against an impending US-led
military invasion of Iraq (Koch, 2003).



Globalization and Identity 243


Other solidarity with transworld humanity has grown since the 1950s
around the theme of ‘development’. The specific content of this term has
remained ambiguous and contested, but a broad transplanetary consensus
has emerged that all of humanity should benefit from certain economic, polit¬
ical, cultural and ecological standards of living. Moreover, millions of indiv¬
iduals have undertaken acts of solidarity (in terms of financial donations,
voluntary labour, etc.) with the aim of assisting ‘development’ to a ‘humane’
condition anywhere and everywhere on Earth. A smaller circle of people has
been ready furthermore to contemplate a fundamental reallocation of world
resources in the name of distributive justice for global humankind.

In addition, some policy thinkers have recently begun to promote a
notion of ‘global public goods’, where the ‘public’ that needs to be served
by collectively enjoyed materials and services is a transworld humanity. In
economics theory, public goods are things that everyone needs and which
should be denied to no one. Examples include disease control and trans¬
port infrastructure. Traditionally, in territorialist times, public goods have
been conceived in relation to a national economy. Of late, however, some
policy discourse has reformulated the concept in global terms (Kaul, 1999,
2003).

Further increased social identification with the global species is evidenced
through the growth since the 1940s of a substantial transworld human rights
regime (Dunne and Wheeler, 1999). The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, issued in 1948, has gained the adherence of all but a handful of the
world’s states. Governments have also since the 1950s acceded in large
numbers to UN-sponsored human rights treaties. There are now 189 state
parties to the 1949 Geneva Convention, 148 state parties to the 1966
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and 132 state parties to
the 1948 Genocide Convention. The installation of a permanent
International Criminal Court in 2002 had seemed a utopian fantasy ten years
earlier. Outside official circles, millions of citizens have supported transworld
human rights organizations like the Anti-Apartheid Movement, launched in
1959, and Amnesty International, formed in 1961.

The global human rights regime arguably contains within it an incipient
notion of global citizenship, that is, the principle that individuals hold
certain entitlements and obligations as members of a transplanetary polity
(Hutchings and Dannreuther, 1999; Castles and Davidson, 2000; Delanty,
2000; Carter, 2001; Miinch, 2001; Dower and Williams, 2002; Heater,
2002; Linklater, 2002; Pogge, 2002; Dower, 2003; O’Byrne, 2003). In spite
of increased discussion of the subject, however, it remains far from clear
what global citizenship would precisely entail. Moreover, to date formal
citizenship has only existed in relation to states and, in the exceptional case
of the European Union, to a regional governance framework. Nevertheless,
growing talk of global citizenship reflects greater self-identification with a



244 Change and Continuity


transplanetary human community. The principle may well obtain more
formalized expression in years to come.

In sum, global environmental concerns, transworld humanitarian relief
operations, the transplanetary human rights movement, and emergent
discourses of global public goods and global citizenship all show increasing
self-identification with humanity as a whole in the contemporary globaliz¬
ing world. This is not necessarily to endorse the trend. After all, cosmopoli¬
tan universalism can have objectionable aspects, for example, if it
dogmatically imposes a particular religious vision or western liberal
modernism across the planet and denies any validity to other life-worlds,
including national self-understandings (Kessler, 2000; Fine, 2003). In any
case, there is little sign that increased attachments to global humanity are
displacing national and other communitarian identities. Other sections of
this chapter amply indicate that globalization has not negated these other
identities and on the contrary often bolsters them. Humanity is one of multi¬
ple - and sometimes competing - touchstones of identity in the contempor¬
ary globalizing world.


Religion

One of the other types of transworld identity that has markedly grown with
contemporary globalization relates to religious faith. True, key events in a
religion’s history and its main shrines are usually associated with particular
territorial places. Thus, for example, Bethlehem has been a key site in
Christian belief, and the temple at Ayodhya has had core importance for
Hindu revivalists. In addition, some nationalist campaigns have focused on
religious differences as a primary basis for drawing boundaries between terri¬
torial communities, say, in Ireland and former Yugoslavia.

However, the core tenets of a world religion are in principle nonterritorial:
they can be embraced and practised anywhere on earth. The key identity
distinction for a person of faith is not between a proximate ‘native’ and a
distant ‘foreigner’, but between believers and non-believers. Thus Ayatollah
Ruhollah Musavi Khomeini declared that his return to Tehran in 1979 after
prolonged exile evoked no special emotion, for his ‘homeland’ was Islam
(Simpson, 1988: 29-30).

Contemporary globalization has provided a context for considerable reli¬
gious resurgence across multiple confessions: Baha’i, Buddhist, Christian,
Hindu, Islam, Judaic, Sikh, and various so-called New Age faiths (Robertson
and Garrett, 1991). As discussed in Chapter 8, some of this resurgence has
challenged the prevailing rationalist structure of knowledge. In other cases
people have attempted to synthesize religious belief with modern science
(Golshani, 2004). However, the key concern in the present chapter is with
identity frameworks rather than knowledge structures. The important point



Globalization and Identity 245


at this juncture is that faith has obtained greater significance as a nonterrito¬
rial touchstone of identity in today’s more global world.

Accelerated globalization of recent times has enabled co-religionists
across the planet to have greater direct contact with one another. Global
communications, global organizations, global finance and the like have
allowed ideas of the transworld umma of Muslims and the universal
Christian church to be given concrete shape as never before (Mandaville,
2001). Aeroplanes have taken Popes anywhere and drawn haji from every¬
where. The scale of the yearly pilgrimage to Mecca has grown from around
a hundred thousand in the 1920s to well over two million today. Satellite
broadcasts have enabled televangelists to preach global sermons. Thousands
of Mormons and pentecostalists have undertaken global missions.
Promoters of every major faith have maintained websites: Hindu
Matrimonial International, Islam Online, Totally Jewish, etc. In 1995, the
Vatican website attracted over 300,000 hits from 70 countries at Christmas
(FT, 19 February 1996: 13). The Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC), founded in 1971 with headquarters in Jeddah, has occupied a spot in
global governance. Its International Islamic News Agency has aimed to
spread awareness of Muslim causes and views. A Universal Islamic
Declaration on Human Rights was promulgated in 1981 as a Muslim alter¬
native to the purportedly west-centric human rights regimes emanating from
the United Nations.

At the same time as being pursued through global channels, assertions of
religious identity have, like nationalist strivings, often also been partly a
defensive reaction to globalization. In these cases religious revitalization has
waxed into a kind of nonterritorial cultural protectionism, particularly for
those who have associated globalization with oppressions of westernization
and Americanization. On the other hand, these faith-based resistances have
also used transworld connections to promote their own cultural visions. Thus
with global communications the Islamic Revolution in Iran found echoes
across the planet at greater speeds and (non)distances than any previous
Muslim revivalist initiative (Esposito, 1990).

Certain former proponents of containment in the Cold War have high¬
lighted religious revivalism in contemporary globalization to claim that a
‘clash of civilizations’ has replaced the planetary rift between Soviet-led and
US-led blocs of states (Huntington, 1993,1996). On this account, faith-based
identities have become the principal fault line in global politics. Such a view is
overly simplistic, however. It overlooks diversities within and commonalities
across religions, so that faith-based groups do not form monolithic, neatly
separable, and diametrically opposed blocs. In addition, the thesis neglects the
significance of other frameworks of identity, like nationality and class, which
often shape social life in ways that work contrary to religious affiliations. Yet
it is not necessary to adopt a ‘clash of civilizations’ perspective to acknowledge



246 Change and Continuity


the significance of religious faith as a basis of identity in - and promoted by -
contemporary globalization.


Class

Whereas the category of ‘humanity’ covers all people on earth, and several
messianic religions would like to encompass the entire population of the
planet, other nonterritorial identities have a sectoral character that inherently
limits them to only part of humankind. One such affiliation is class: that is,
identity based on socio-economic role and corresponding privileges and/or
disadvantages. Class can be conceived in broad binary categories of bour¬
geoisie/proletariat, capital/labour, or managers/workers. In addition, more
specific class groupings can be identified in terms of domestics, factory work¬
ers, investors, peasants, professionals and the unemployed.

Like most things in globalization, transworld class identities have a long
history. For example, the European aristocracy has for centuries constituted
itself as a class network on a macro-regional scale. During colonial times this
circle was extended, to a limited degree, to include traditional hereditary
rulers from other parts of the globe. Likewise, as mentioned in Chapter 3, a
number of early capitalists in Europe regarded themselves as a supranational
social group, and labour internationals have existed since the 1860s.
However, as also with most things in globalization, the main concrete mani¬
festations of transplanetary class identities have come in recent times.

Much of the most striking evidence of growing supraterritorial class bonds
in contemporary history has related to elite circles. Globally mobile business,
civil society, governance and media figures have increasingly identified with
each other in what Susan Strange has termed ‘a transnational managerial
class’ (1994: 138; see also Fennema, 1982; Cox, 1987; Pijl, 1989; Embong,
2000; Robinson and Harris, 2000; Sklair, 2001). Commonalities that bond
this transworld group include global English, degrees from leading Northern
universities, global professional attire, frequent flyer programmes, global job
mobility, investments in global financial instruments, multiple citizenships,
and children educated in international schools. Indeed, shared experiences of
these kinds permit many in this class to move with ease between jobs in the
corporate, civil society, regulatory and journalistic sectors.

Global elite circles tend to congregate around a number of global associa¬
tions and conferences. Prominent venues of this kind include the Paris-based
International Chamber of Commerce, annual and spring meetings of the IMF
and World Bank, UN summits and, perhaps best known, the World
Economic Forum. Since its inauguration in 1971, the WEF has organized
hundreds of country, regional and global meetings of business executives,
senior governance officials, politicians, and civil society leaders, including its
widely publicized annual jamborees in Davos, Switzerland. The three-day



Globalization and Identity 247


Davos meetings attract some 3,000 participants at a cost of some $10,000 per
head. Membership of the WEF, with annual subscriptions starting at
$12,000, requires that a firm have a capital base or a yearly turnover of at
least $1 billion. The WEF has been instrumental in launching the Uruguay
Round of trade negotiations that produced the WTO and in forging links
between local and global capital in China, India, Latin America, Russia and
post-apartheid South Africa (Pigman, 2002; Graz, 2003; Simonson, 2006).
Given this profile and power, the Davos meetings have since 2000 been a
major target of so-called ‘anti-globalization’ protests.

To be sure, the influence of global elite associations like the WEF can be
overplayed. Global managers do not have a single and tightly coordinated
strategy of planetary rule. Nevertheless, with contemporary globalization
something like the supraterritorial union of capitalists described (prema¬
turely) on the eve of World War I in Karl Kautsky’s speculations on ‘ultra¬
imperialism’ has arguably taken shape (Kautsky, 1914).

Certainly transplanetary elite links have developed further than nonterri¬
torial working class identities. Although globalization has proceeded much
further in the present day than in the early twentieth century, transworld
organizations of labour have strengthened relatively little in the interim.
True, the ICFTU as of 2005 grouped 234 national trade union centres from
152 territories, while membership of the World Confederation of Labour
(WCL) as of 2001 spanned 144 unions from 116 countries. (The two global
organizations are likely to agree a merger in 2005.) Sectoral global trade
secretariats like the International Metalworkers Federation (another IMF!)
and Public Services International (PSI) have also remained active. Other
global working-class identity has found expression outside traditional labour
hierarchies in initiatives like the Union Network International (UNI), an
online ‘cybertariat’ founded in 2000. In addition, certain new social move¬
ments (for example, concerning human rights) have embraced nonterritorial
working-class interests.

Global workers’ solidarity has found expression in a number of labour
disputes (Kamel, 1990: ch 5). For example, the miners’ strike of 1984-5 in
Britain attracted transworld backing (Saunders, 1989). Sacked dockers from
Liverpool in England toured 15 countries in 1995-6 to garner support for
their cause (Waterman, 1998: 258). Workers across North America
campaigned against the NAFTA accord in 1993 (Kidder and McGinn, 1995).
Various labour activists have used the Internet to build a ‘new international¬
ism’ of resistance to global capital (Lee, 1997b).

Underclasses have also constructed some transworld solidarities outside
the labour movement. For example, since 1993 the Via Campesina has given
global form to peasant struggles, now with members in 60 countries
(Desmarais, 2002). Representatives of the urban poor in Asia and Southern
Africa have maintained community exchange programmes since the late



248 Change and Continuity


1980s and organized themselves formally as Shack/Slum Dwellers
International in 1996 (Patel et al., 2001). Another small-scale initiative, the
Participation Resource Action Network, has linked poor people across four
continents (Gaventa, 1999). Thousands of transworld partnerships between
North-based and South-based development NGOs have likewise champi¬
oned the interests of the poor, although the NGO activists themselves have
often come from more privileged circles.

Yet the illustrations just given have marked the exception rather than the
rule. On the whole transplanetary solidarities based on underclass identities
have figured fairly marginally in contemporary global politics. Most shop
floors have known no transworld organizations or Internet links. Indeed, in
the contemporary situation of mobile global capital and considerable struc¬
tural unemployment, wage earners at different corners of the planet have
sooner been set in competition against each another.


Gender

Other pronounced deterritorialization of collective identities has occurred in
the context of contemporary globalization in respect of gender. These trans¬
planetary solidarities have built on differences between femininity and
masculinity, including various gender inequalities that are explored in
Chapter 10. Formal organizations with an explicit focus on gender have
developed mainly among women, although recent history has also seen the
emergence - halting, mainly reactive, and on a much smaller scale - of men’s
movements (Pease and Pringle, 2001).

An unprecedented proliferation and growth of transworld networks that
are devoted specifically to the advancement of women’s interests has
occurred since the 1970s (Rowbotham and Linkogle, 2001; Naples and
Desai, 2002; Mohanty, 2003; Antrobus, 2004). Gender politics have turned
matters such as physical abuses of women, reproduction strategies, equal
opportunities between the sexes, and women’s labour into ‘global gender
issues’ (Peterson and Runyan, 1999). Six UN-sponsored global women’s
conferences with attendance running into many thousands have taken place
at five-yearly intervals between 1975 and 2005. Women’s associations have
also figured prominently in the NGO Forums that have been held almost
annually since the 1990s alongside special UN meetings (Pietila and Vickers,
1996). Like indigenous peoples, women’s struggles have on various occa¬
sions found support from global governance agencies and global conven¬
tions that was lacking from a patriarchal state and its territorial law
(Stienstra, 1994). More informally, women activists have developed much
solidarity through the Internet as ‘a global room of our own’ (Harcourt,
1999: xiv).



Globalization and Identity 249


Race

Along with faith, class and gender, race has provided another important
nonterritorial framework of identity in the contemporary globalizing world.
On these occasions collective solidarity has developed in relation to shared
bodily features, especially skin pigmentation, and shared social experiences
(often oppressive) associated with those phenotypical characteristics. In the
words of one black activist based in Sao Paulo (Carneiro, 2002),

Globalization provides us with an opportunity to recognize that people of
African descent throughout the world form a community of destiny and
face similar problems. My identity as a person of African descent can be
greater than my national identity.

Racial consciousness - in particular ‘black’/‘white’ and ‘yellow’/‘white’
dualisms - emerged as a significant social circumstance several hundred years
ago and became pervasive throughout the world in the second half of the
nineteenth century. As noted in Chapter 3, some racially based transworld
solidarity developed in the 1880s and 1890s among Anglo-Saxons and Pan-
Africanists. In contemporary times, global associations that put an explicit
emphasis on race have mainly linked people of colour. However, some
transworld coalitions of white supremacists have also developed, including
through the Internet.

Shared experiences of racial discrimination were one important stimulus
to the development of transplanetary Third World solidarity in the 1960s and
1970s. Global governance agencies and global communications have greatly
facilitated the activities of inter alia the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Group of 77, both formed in the early 1960s. Global connections likewise
lent much strength to the Anti-Apartheid Movement during its 35-year
campaign against legalized racism in South Africa.

In addition, consultations between leading Africans and prominent African-
Americans gained some prominence in the 1990s. For instance, a Policy
Summit joining these circles at Abidjan in 1991 drew 1,500 participants. In
another initiative, the first black governor of a US state hosted 25 African heads
of government in the capital of Virginia in 1993 (Leanne, 1994: 2). Among
other things, such conferences have generated substantial contributions from
black Americans to education efforts in Africa. The Congressional Black
Caucus and its foreign policy lobby Trans Africa, both formed in the 1970s,
were influential in prompting the introduction of wide-ranging official US
economic sanctions against apartheid in 1986 as well as US military interven¬
tion in Somalia and Haiti during the early 1990s (Johnson, 1998). A Strategic
Alliance of Afro-Descendents of Latin America and the Caribbean has linked
groups in 14 countries of that region since 1994.



250 Change and Continuity


Alongside this overtly political activity, electronic mass media have played
an important role in forging notions of nonterritorial black identity and soli¬
darity. On the Internet, for example, African-Americans have carved distinc¬
tive racial spaces like NetNoir and The Black World Today, in some cases
including links to the broader African diaspora (Lekhi, 2000). In the context
of global consumerism, many marketers have deliberately promoted the
‘blackness’ of certain music, literature, sitcoms and celebrities. At a grass¬
roots level, many members of the African diaspora have taken to donning
‘native’ dress as an identity statement. More negatively, globalization can
advance nonterritorial black solidarities insofar as the pains of the accompa¬
nying economic restructuring have been perceived - often correctly - to fall
disproportionately on people of colour.


Youth

Other nonterritorial identity has developed in the course of globalization
with respect to youth. Nominally this category relates to a particular age
group, though more generally it encompasses lifestyles and phases of psycho¬
logical development that are identified as ‘young’.

Much contemporary global culture has been youth culture. Global
consumerism has linked young people across the planet through shared cult
films, music hits, slang, and fashion trends. Satellite music television stations
have since the 1980s come to reach several hundred million households on all
inhabited continents. Global audio-visual media have arguably made many
of today’s youth more familiar with Hollywood’s constructions of America
than with many parts of their ‘home’ countries. Global backpacking has
brought young people (mainly from wealthier circles in the North) into
contact with their generational peers at all corners of the earth.

That said, it is not clear that these increased transworld contacts have
created deep and lasting bonds of global youth solidarity. True, student
activism of the late 1960s took encouragement from intercontinental support
between Berlin, Chicago, London, Paris and Prague. Many so-called ‘anti¬
globalization’ protests of recent years have likewise created global networks
of young people that converge in periodic public meetings and maintain other
links virtually through the Internet. On the whole, however, youthfulness has
been a touchstone for transworld identity without corresponding politics of
transplanetary solidarity and struggle.


Sexual orientation

Another touchstone of growing nonterritorial identity has related to sexual
preference, in particular lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (lgbt) orient¬
ations. True, sexual minorities are age-old. Indeed, some evidence suggests



Globalization and Identity 251


that these proclivities have genetic as well as social bases. However, apart
from some shortlived gay activism in the early twentieth century, it is only in
the time of accelerated globalization that sexual minorities have identified
themselves as ‘peoples’. In other words, sexual disposition has become a
touchstone of collective identity, solidarity and strivings for self-determina¬
tion (Adam, 1987; Cruickshank, 1992; Adam etai, 1999).

The historical concurrence of the lgbt revolution with the growth of
supraterritorial spaces is significant. As with the other cases already
discussed, globalization has made room for affiliations based on sexuality by
loosening the hold of territorial identities. It bears remembering in this regard
that, historically, the modern state criminalized homosexuality and drove it
underground (Mosse, 1985). In addition, much ‘coming out’ has occurred at
supraterritorial locations: on television and in film; through telephone
switchboards; in global music and sport (including the first World Outgames
scheduled for 2006); with gay tourism and migration; by lobbying of supra-
state institutions; via the ‘queerplanet’ and other computer conferences; and,
unhappily, in response to the global AIDS epidemic and its attendant homo-
phobic backlash. In territorial spaces sexual minorities have tended to be
isolated and hidden from one another; yet in global arenas lgbts can veritably
claim, ‘we are everywhere’ (cf. Manalansan, 1997; Altman, 2001: ch 6).

Various transworld and regional organizations to support sexual minori¬
ties have appeared since the formation in 1978 of the International Lesbian
and Gay Association (ILGA). Today the Brussels-based ILGA includes over
400 member groups in around 90 countries (ILGA, 2005). In addition,
Amnesty International has since the 1990s actively campaigned against
persecution of lgbt people the world over (AI-LGBT, 2005).

In sum, the disruption, through globalization, of the equation of ‘space’
and ‘territory’ has encouraged the growth of social mobilization around vari¬
ous nonterritorial identities in contemporary history. In addition to the seven
types of affiliation discussed in more detail above, other global solidarities
have focused on a particular disability, profession, or recreational activity. In
this way computer bulletin boards, telephone help lines and the like have
encouraged the development of ‘electronic tribes’ of cancer patients, lawyers,
football fanatics, etc. (S. Jones, 1994). Likewise, email, global journals,
multilateral research teams, and transworld conference circuits have forged
nonterritorial ‘epistemic communities’ that have come to figure centrally in
many academic professions (Haas, 1992).

True, the extent and depth of nonterritorial affiliations must not be exag¬
gerated. Globalist enthusiasts often celebrate the potentials of transplane¬
tary human solidarities more than their actual impacts. Nevertheless, it
would be equally mistaken to reiterate today Heidegger’s conclusion,
spoken on the eve of contemporary intense globalization, that ‘the frantic
abolition of all distances brings no nearness’ (1950: 165). On the contrary,



252 Change and Continuity


transworld identities related to humanity, faith, class, gender, race, age,
sexual orientation and disability have come to figure significantly in the social
networks and political struggles of hundreds of millions of people.


Hybridization

Taken together, the different trends described so far suggest a general struc¬
tural shift in the construction of identity under contemporary conditions of
intense globalization, namely, towards increased hybridization (Nederveen
Pieterse, 1995,2004). A hybrid identity draws from and blends several differ¬
ent strands in substantial measure, so that no single marker holds clear and
consistent primacy over others. For example, a hybrid self might encompass
several nationalities, or might be of mixed race, or might have a multifaceted
sexuality, or might combine different class contexts. Likewise, a hybrid iden¬
tity can give strong emphasis to several types of being and belonging, with the
result that, for instance, national loyalties, religious bonds, and gender soli¬
darities could compete and conflict.

Hybridization has not been new to the present period of accelerated glob¬
alization, of course. In earlier times, too, identities were in practice often not
centred on a single state-nation as completely and unreservedly as the previ¬
ously cited quotations from Niebuhr and Emerson affirmed. For example, a
century ago intimate contacts between colonizers and colonized induced
many experiences of plural and in some ways contradictory identities on both
sides of those encounters. Immigrants, too, were frequently torn between
their original and adopted territorial homelands well before air travel and
telephone calls allowed migrants to ‘stay’ in their place of birth from a
distance.

However, the immediacy of the whole planet in contemporary globality
has greatly multiplied and intensified experiences of being several selves at
once. In the author’s current place of residence, for example, the evening tele¬
vision news can, in a matter of minutes, emphasize notions of ‘us’ in relation
to the Midlands, England, Britain, Europe and humanity. A Chinese family
living in Mexico deposits its wealth in euros at a Saudi-owned bank located
in Switzerland: where are their attachments? A Fijian citizen of Indian descent
works in Paris for a US-based accountancy firm: who is she? What collective
identity do we ascribe to the computer programmer (sitting beside me on a
flight from Chicago to London) who moves between South Africa, Western
Europe and North America, having no fixed address and never staying in any
country for more than a fortnight? What does one make, in identity terms, of
sex workers from Africa lining Tverskaya Street in Moscow, dressed in tradi¬
tional Russian costume that hardly any local would today wear? In countless
such situations, globalization has produced striking cultural mixes.



Globalization and Identity 253


Global relations can in this way decentre the self. Fredric Jameson has
spoken along these lines of a ‘postmodern’ condition where ‘everyone “repre¬
sents” several groups all at once’ (1991: 322). Anthony Smith has depicted a
global culture that is ‘tied to no place or period... a true melange of disparate
components drawn from everywhere and nowhere’ (1990b: 177). In like vein
Octavio Ianni has characterized globalization as ‘a vast and intricate process
of transculturation’ (Ianni, 1992). James Rosenau has similarly described a
‘turbulence’ of multidirectional shifts in identity and legitimacy sentiments in
the context of globalization (Rosenau, 1990). According to Lothar Brock,
globalization has encouraged ‘identity surfing’, where people slide from iden¬
tity to identity in borderless realms of unconnectedness (1993:170).

These quotations depict more intense instances of hybridity than most
people experience in their day-to-day lives at the start of the twenty-first
century. Nevertheless, globalization has tended to increase the sense of a fluid
and fragmented self, particularly for persons who spend large proportions of
their time in supraterritorial spaces, where multiple identities readily
converge and create ‘lost souls’ (Iyer, 2000). In more globalized lives, identity
is less easily taken for granted; self-definitions and associated group loyalties
are much more up for grabs.

Hybrid identities present significant challenges for the construction of
community. How can deep and reliable social bonds be forged when indivi¬
duals have multiple and perhaps competing senses of self - and indeed often
feel pretty unsettled in all of them? How can populations - including those
united in disadvantage - fix a ‘we’ when so many people are polycultural?

Hybridity can hardly be reconciled with a communitarian approach to
forging social cohesion and advancing political struggle. In this tradition,
solidarity in large-scale communities is established primarily through ‘other-
ing’: that is, drawing neat distinctions and oppositions between ‘in’ and ‘out’
groups. However, identities in a more global world are too multiple and over¬
lapping to make sustainable ‘us’/‘them’ divisions into discrete communities.
Under conditions of hybridity, persons who belong with ‘them’ in one respect
belong with ‘us’ in another. Thus, for example, individuals who are bonded
together when they emphasize a national aspect of their identity readily find
themselves affiliated with other circles when they emphasize class, gender,
race or other dimensions. In a world of widespread hybridity it is impossible
to follow the communitarian formula with clarity and consistency, as done in
territorialist-nationalist times of old.

If globalization, through associated pluralization and hybridization,
contradicts communitarianism, what are the implications for citizenship?
Can citizenship be based on state-national identity alone, as previously,
when so many other aspects of identity are foregrounded in the contempor¬
ary more global world? If being, belonging and becoming are experienced
in more diverse and more blended ways, do institutions of citizenship



254 Change and Continuity


require a fundamental reconstruction to accommodate this multidimen¬
sionality? References earlier in this chapter to dual-national citizenship,
regional citizenship and global citizenship suggest that older assumptions
that citizenship is singular, national and fixed are already not viable in a
globalizing world of hybridization. Whether wanted or not, circumstances
are in a transition, as Andrew Linklater puts it, ‘to a condition in which
sovereignty, territoriality, nationality, and citizenship are no longer welded
together to define the nature and purpose of political association’ (1998:
44). Constructing democratic community for this kind of world is a major
challenge for the future.


Conclusion

As with production and governance, then, globalization has had important
cause-and-effect relations with structures of identity. On the one hand, as


Implications of globalization for identity in
summary

Proliferation of national identities

• persistent and in many cases reinvigorated state-nations

• growth of micro-nations, including indigenous peoples’ movements

• modest emergence of region-nations

• deepening ties within transworld national diasporas

Encouragement of nonterritorial identities

• growth of self-identifications with a globally spread human species

• resurgence of faith-based identities, especially in religious revivalist
movements

• rise of a number of global class identities

• rise of gender identities, particularly through global women’s move¬
ments

• rise of racial identities, especially among people of colour

• spread of global youth culture

• growth of sexual orientation as a basis of social identity and group affil¬
iation

Greater hybridization

• more plural and mixed identities

• resultant non-viability of communitarian approaches to building
collective solidarity




Globalization and Identity 255


seen in Chapter 4, the growth of transplanetary spaces has flowed in part
from certain dynamics of identity construction. At the same time, as seen in
the present chapter, the spread of global connectivity has had significant
implications for identity frameworks. These consequences are recapitulated
in the summary box.

In short, then, the significance of globalization has lain not in eliminating
nationhood, but in substantially complicating the construction of identity.
Globalization has facilitated an upsurge of multiple identities that has in past
decades eroded the position of the state-nation as the preeminent structure of
self-definition and collective solidarity. In the resultant process of hybridiza¬
tion, constructions of collective identities have tended to become more multi¬
dimensional, fluid and uncertain. Although globalization has not dissolved
the nationality principle, this transformation of geography has ended the
near-monopoly that this notion held on structures of identity in the first half
of the twentieth century and thereby raised fundamental questions about the
nature of citizenship and the shape of political struggle.



Chapter 8

Globalization and Knowledge:
From Rationalism to Reflexivity

Main points of this chapter

Epistemology

Ontology

Methodology

Aesthetics

Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• contemporary globalization has not substantially weakened the hold of
rationalism on the social construction of knowledge, although some
rationality has become more reflexive

• the rise of transplanetary connectivity has encouraged some growth in
anti-rationalist knowledges like religious revivalism, ecocentrism and
postmodernism

• the growth of transworld relations has promoted some shifts in ontology,
methodology and aesthetics


Together with frameworks of space, production, governance and identity,
the structure of knowledge is, in the perspective adopted in this book, a fifth
primary facet of a social order. How people understand is a key social ques¬
tion alongside (and interrelated with) issues of how people bond, regulate,
produce, and construct space. Moreover, just as prevailing structures in
regard to identity, governance, production and geography vary by setting, so
too underlying frameworks of knowledge shift with socio-historical context.
It is therefore important to consider whether and how globalization has
affected knowledge patterns.

Questions of knowledge have already surfaced at a number of earlier junc¬
tures in this book. For example, it was indicated in Chapter 2 that global
consciousness (that is, awareness of the planet as a single place) is one of the
main manifestations of transplanetary connectivity. It was noted in Chapter
3 that a global imagination has figured in the history of transworld relations


256




Globalization and Knowledge 257


for at least half a millennium. And it was seen in Chapter 4 that the predom¬
inant modern structure of knowledge, rationalism, has been vital to the
creation of global social spaces. Now the present chapter assesses the conse¬
quences of contemporary globalization for rationalism and knowledge
patterns more generally.

As mentioned in Chapter 1, several authors have linked globality with a
purported decline or even demise of modern rationality. Martin Albrow has
presented a particularly explicit and articulate statement of this thesis
(Albrow, 1996). Certain other sociologists have linked globalization with the
challenge to rationalism posed by contemporary religious resurgence move¬
ments, including what has popularly often been called ‘fundamentalism’
(Robertson and Chirico, 1985; Robertson and Garrett, 1991; Beyer, 1994;
Bastian etal., 2001; Hopkins, 2001).

Yet announcements of the death of modern rationality in the face of glob¬
alization are no less premature than proclamations of the end of territoriality,
capital, state and nation. True, as is elaborated in the first section below,
global flows have in some ways made room for non-rationalist knowledges
such as religious revivalism, ecocentrism and postmodernist thought.
However, most knowledge that has circulated in contemporary expanded
global spaces has continued to exhibit the core rationalist attributes of secu¬
larism, anthropocentrism, scientism and instrumentalism. To this extent,
globalization to date has tended to spread and strengthen the position of
modern rationality.

This is not to say, though, that the rise of transplanetary connectivity has
left rationalist knowledge untouched. On the contrary, as later parts of this
chapter indicate, this respatialization of social relations has contributed to
several broad shifts in the attributes of modern rationality. In respect of epist¬
emology, for example, global problems such as ecological degradation and
financial crises have encouraged a greater appreciation of the limitations and
potential dangers of rationalism. In terms of ontology, contemporary global¬
ization has fostered a different conception of ‘the world’ (now more global)
to which reason is applied, as well as different appreciations of time. With
regard to methodology, the spread of globality has helped to promote new
fields of study, new approaches to education, new literacies, and new kinds of
scientific evidence. In the area of aesthetics, globalization has facilitated the
emergence of new forms and appreciations of beauty.

To be sure, the growth of transworld spaces has not been the only cause
of these contemporary developments in the social construction of know¬
ledge. For one thing, localized circumstances have strongly influenced
whether or not reactions against rationalism occur and, if so, how intensely
and in what guises. In addition, contemporary shifts in knowledge have
emerged partly out of developments within science, philosophy and religion
themselves. However, in combination with other impulses, globalization



25 8 Change and Continuity


has exerted some important influences on knowledge structures in contemp¬
orary history.


Epistemology

One key aspect of a knowledge system is the underlying notion of knowledge,
or what philosophers formally call epistemology. Epistemology (of which
people are often only minimally conscious) prescribes what counts as ‘fact’,
‘explanation’ and ‘understanding’. In what ways, if any, has contemporary
globalization altered conceptions of the character of knowledge?

Once again the answer is one of change and continuity. The growth of
global relations in recent history has in some respects promoted a rise of anti¬
rationalist epistemologies, in forms including religious revivalism, ecocen-
trism and postmodernism. However, in the main globalization has thus far
reinforced and extended the hold of modern notions of reason. At the same
time, contemporary globalization has also encouraged turns toward greater
reflexivity in some rationalist thinking. In reflexive rationality the main
precepts of rationalism continue to reign, but people subject this epistemo¬
logy and the knowledge that results from it to more critical examination.


Persistent rationalism

Rationalism has ranked as the most powerful epistemology in modern social
relations. Yet, like any other construction of knowledge, the rationalist
perspective is socially and historically bound. It ascended in particular places
(starting with the North Atlantic area), in particular social circles (starting
with middle-class intellectuals), and in particular times (especially from the
eighteenth century onwards). In turn, rationalism may be expected to give
way to other epistemologies when socio-historical conditions become ripe for
such a transformation.

Has the contemporary rise of transplanetary connectivity constituted an
occasion for a transition to a postrationalist epistemology? Have this recon¬
figuration of geography and accompanying shifts in production, governance
and identity made modern rationality unsustainable? Although rationalism
has figured as a major cause of globalization, has the contemporary reorga¬
nization of social space reverberated to undermine that knowledge structure?

Such a proposition is difficult to sustain, particularly since rationalism has
remained integral to most transworld relations. For one thing, global
communications technologies have well served modern science and its chief
production sites, like universities and research institutes. Global markets,
global production, global finance and global organizations have likewise
mainly reproduced secular and instrumental thinking. Global ecological



Globalization and Knowledge 259


problems and prevailing policy responses to them have reflected a persistence
of anthropocentric attempts to subordinate nature to human purposes with
science and technology. Similarly, most global consciousness has had a decid¬
edly secular character.

Moreover, the currently most influential policy approaches to globaliza¬
tion, summarily described in Chapter 1, have rested firmly on rationalist
premises. Neoliberalism, reformism and economic nationalism have exhib¬
ited a thoroughly secular, anthropocentric, techno-scientific and instrument¬
alist orientation to knowledge. Among transformist perspectives, anarchist
and socialist views on globalization, too, have involved a rationalist epistem¬
ology. By comparison, non-rationalist approaches to knowledge like
revivalist religion and postmodernism have generally had far less influence in
the politics of globalization.

In these ways contemporary globalization can be associated with a further
ascendance of rationalism to unprecedented strength. Indeed, religious prac¬
tices have declined in many circles across the planet during the period of
accelerated globalization, particularly in the OECD countries where trans¬
planetary connections have become most widespread. (Continuing high
levels of church attendance in the USA have formed an exception in this
regard.) The thought patterns of global managers have in most cases been as
anthropocentric as knowledge comes. Capitalist production and bureau¬
cratic governance - both of them substantially advanced through contempor¬
ary globalization - each involve intensely instrumentalist orientations. In
short, the growth of global relations has in various ways extended rationalist
knowledge to more parts of the planet and to more parts of human lives.

Indeed, people who construct knowledge in secular, anthropocentric,
techno-scientific, instrumental terms have generally exercised the greatest
power in global spaces. Rationalist epistemology has reigned supreme in
global enterprises, global governance agencies and the more influential parts
of global civil society like think tanks and professional NGOs. People who
espouse Hindu revivalism, deep ecology or an ultra-relativist postmodernism
have not tended to work for British Petroleum (BP), the Bank for
International Settlements, or Amnesty International.


Religious revivalism

On the other hand, global spaces have in some respects also accommodated
nonrationalist epistemologies and have in some cases even facilitated anti¬
rationalist movements. For instance, the decades of accelerated globalization
have witnessed numerous instances of religious revivalism, where believers
have sought to regain their faith’s original, premodern, essential truth. This
‘fundamentalism’ has appeared across all of the major world religions (Kepel,
1991; Marty and Appleby, 1991). For one thing, charismatic and evangelical



260 Change and Continuity


movements have proliferated in Protestant circles across the continents in
contemporary times (Poewe, 1994). Meanwhile many quarters of Eastern
Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism have experienced heightened conser¬
vatism, the latter especially since 1978 under the pontificates of John Paul II
and Benedict XVI. Concurrently, Islamic revivalism has attained consider¬
able strength in many parts of Central, South West, South and South East
Asia as well as North Africa. Judaic revivalism of groups like Gush Emunim
(‘Bloc of the Faithful’), founded in 1974, has motivated many Jewish settlers
in territories occupied by Israel in the Six-Day War of 1967. In India the
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP),
and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) have sought to Hinduize politics and
radicalize Hinduism. Meanwhile various forms of Buddhist revival have
unfolded in Mongolia, Sri Lanka and Thailand.

Contemporary globalization has encouraged religious revivalism in
several ways. On the one hand, many of these anti-rationalist strivings can be
understood in part as defensive reactions against encroachments by global
forces on established cultures and livelihoods. This point has been previously
elaborated in discussions of rejectionist discourses and transworld religious
identities. Yet at the same time, as also noted in Chapter 7, a number of
revivalist movements have exploited global relations to advance their causes.
To give further examples in this regard, the leading mullah in Tajikistan has
maintained many of his communications by fax and mobile telephone
(Juergensmeyer, 1993: 5). Meanwhile Ayatollah Khomeini used world
service broadcasts to pronounce his fatwa against the author Salman Rushdie
in 1989.

However, we should not overestimate the scale of religiously based anti¬
rationalism under contemporary globalization. George Weigel surely exag¬
gerated in asserting that ‘the unsecularization of the world is one of the
dominant social facts of life in the late twentieth century’ (cited in
Huntington, 1993: 26; also Berger, 1999). True, several religious revivalist
movements have attracted large followings and exerted notable political
influence. However, on the whole religious resurgence has enlisted only a
limited proportion of humanity and stimulated relatively few major alter¬
ations of public policy, although changes such as increased restrictions on
abortion can have severe consequences for those directly affected.

Moreover, these religious upsurges have not been completely new to
contemporary times of intense globalization. Revivalist reactions against the
secularist character of modern rationality have emerged from time to time
ever since the Enlightenment. For example, the 1920s saw the creation of the
Hinduist RSS and the rise of Islamic revivalism in a number of anti-colonial
struggles (Peters, 1979). An earlier phase of Protestant ‘fundamentalism’ in
the USA culminated in the mid-1920s with a court challenge (in the Scopes
trial) against teaching Darwinian ideas of biological evolution.



Globalization and Knowledge 261


Indeed, just as previous rises of religious revivalism have proved tempor¬
ary, little evidence suggests that recent instances are on course to displace
rationalism as the dominant epistemology in today’s globalizing world.
Transplanetary relations have helped to stimulate and sustain some renewals
of anti-rationalist faith, but global networks have more usually promoted
activities involving rationalist knowledge. Contemporary revivalist move¬
ments have largely replayed a long-term tendency - one that well predates
contemporary accelerated globalization - whereby certain religious circles
have from time to time revolted against modern secularism and scientism.

Meanwhile today, as during much of the past two centuries, many if not
most influential religious thinkers have sought to marry faith and reason, that
is, to combine and reconcile experience of the transcendent with scientific and
instrumental knowledge. Thus, for example, the director of a global bank
might be a techno-scientific economist by day and a practising Buddhist after
hours. Modernizing tendencies in Islam have rivalled revivalist movements.
Likewise, reform Judaism has on balance exerted as much influence as
revivalist Judaism. Many if not most Christians, Confucians and Hindus, too,
have sought to adjust their religious understanding to accommodate modern
rationality. In short, revivalist anti-rationalism has been a minority tendency
even in many faith circles.


Ecocentrism

Next to religious revivalism, ecocentrism has formed a second noteworthy
reaction in contemporary history against prevailing rationalist epistemology.
The term ‘ecocentrism’ is borrowed from Robyn Eckersley (1992), although
it is here applied to a wider range of authors and arguments. Whereas reli¬
gious revivalisms have taken principal aim against the secularist character of
modern rationality, ecocentrisms have in the first place opposed anthro¬
pocentrism and the attendant drive to control nature for human ends. In
ecocentrist knowledge, humanity exists within - and as but one part of - a
larger life system. For ecocentrists, homo sapiens is subordinate to nature
rather than vice versa, and human desires need to be renounced in favour of
ecological integrity when the two conflict.

Ecocentrism has taken a number of guises in contemporary history. For
example, many indigenous peoples have as part of the assertion of their
collective identity promoted notions of aboriginal knowledge where human
beings are integrated within and subservient to a natural order. Ecocentrist
premises have also underlain notions of ‘deep ecology’, which reject the ‘shal¬
low’ environmentalism of those who advocate so-called ‘sustainable devel¬
opment’ using rationalist knowledge frameworks (Naess, 1976; Devall and
Sessions, 1985). From another angle, ecofeminists have identified rationalism
with masculinism and have opposed both forces in terms of their purported



262 Change and Continuity


violence against nature and women (Warren, 1996). For his part, the invent¬
or James Lovelock has popularized the so-called ‘Gaia’ notion that regards
planet Earth as a living creature to which people owe their greatest responsi¬
bility, ahead of country, state and nation (Lovelock, 1979). Various grass¬
roots environmentalists like anti-road campaigners and animal liberation
groups have likewise tended to understand society in ecocentrist terms.

Globalization has not been the only circumstance to promote the rise of
ecocentrist knowledge, but the growth of transplanetary relations has played
an important part in the trend. In particular, global ecological changes have
raised awareness of the damages that anthropocentric rationalism can inflict.
An appreciation of humanity’s dependence on ecological conditions is height¬
ened in the light of supraterritorial developments (like climate change and
biodiversity loss) from which there is no escape, short of leaving the planet. In
addition, some people have been drawn to ecocentrist thought by the ecolog¬
ical irrationality of much global economic activity. In this vein it might be
asked why foods are shipped between continents, at a cost of considerable air
and sea pollution, when adequate (and often more nutritious) supplies are
usually available from local cultivation. Finally, much as some religious
revivalists have exploited global communications and transworld associa¬
tions to further their causes, so some ecocentrists have benefited from the
transplanetary social movement activities that globalization has made possi¬
ble.

Yet the scale of current ecocentrist challenges to rationalism must not be
exaggerated. Aboriginal knowledge, deep ecology, ecofeminism and the Gaia
hypothesis have, even collectively, attracted relatively small followings. Nor
do present trends suggest that ecocentrism is on the way to becoming more
than a marginal epistemology. Insofar as ecological sensitivities have gained
ground in the context of contemporary globalization, policymakers have
mainly opted for rationalist responses in the vein of so-called ‘sustainable
development’. Such a strategy seeks to perpetuate humanity’s subordination
of nature and to find techno-scientific fixes for environmental problems.


Postmodernism

In addition to religious revivalism and ecocentrism, the time of accelerated
globalization has also witnessed a rise of so-called ‘postmodernist’ epistem¬
ologies. These perspectives on knowledge, briefly introduced in Chapters 1
and 4, have generally retained the secular and anthropocentric orientations of
rationalism. However, postmodernists have rejected scientific claims
concerning objective facts as well as instrumentalist notions that the primary
purpose of knowledge is technical problem-solving.

Against rationalism, postmodernism adopts an anti-universalist and anti-
essentialist view of knowledge. Instead, this alternative epistemology regards



Globalization and Knowledge 263


all knowledge as bound to its time and place, as well as the particular person
who constructs it. Every truth is therefore contingent upon its context. No
understanding transcends its specific personal, cultural and historical setting.
For postmodernists, rationalist notions of scientific objectivity are - like any
other knowledge claim - a myth with no absolute truth about them
(Anderson, 1990). It is social power relations - rather than any fundamental
truth - that have elevated rationalism over other modes of knowledge in
modern times.

Logically, it would be possible to conclude from the relativism of post¬
modernism that all knowledges are equally valid. Some postmodernists have
indeed adopted an ultra-sceptical position toward knowledge, where no
grounds other than personal whim are available for ranking certain values
and beliefs over others. At this extreme, fascism could not be condemned rela¬
tive to liberalism, and no basis would exist to distinguish good art from bad.
In such a situation postmodernism would replace the objectivism of rational¬
ism with an ‘anything-goes’ subjectivism.

However, postmodernists do not - as some of their critics charge - have to
take the rejection of objectivism to a nihilistic conclusion. On the contrary,
many proponents of this alternative epistemology have advanced strongly
held value claims about culture and politics. Postmodernist philosophers like
Michel Foucault and Julia Kristeva have taken very overt and public moral
stands. Some feminists have integrated postmodernist knowledge into strug¬
gles against gender hierarchies (Peterson, 1992). Postmodernist security stud¬
ies have employed the epistemology in value-inspired critiques of military
violence (Campbell and Dillon, 1993). In contrast to religious revivalists,
however, postmodernists regard their truth claims to be contingent and
contestable.

As mentioned in Chapter 1, postmodernism has attracted most of its
explicit adherents in academic circles and the arts. Among academics the
exponents have concentrated mainly in the humanities (especially Literary
Criticism and Philosophy) and on the fringes of social research (including
Anthropology, Geography, Linguistics, Politics and Sociology). In the arts
postmodernist thought has reshaped significant parts of architecture, cinema,
literature, music, painting, sculpture and theatre.

The contemporary growth of postmodernist epistemologies can be
connected to globalization in several ways. For one thing, global relations have,
by eliminating territorial buffers, intensified intercultural contacts and height¬
ened general awareness of cultural diversity and contingency. Many people
have thereby come - in line with postmodernist precepts - to regard their
knowledge as socially and historically relative. Persons who have experienced
intense hybridization of the kind described in Chapter 7 are perhaps most
especially susceptible to postmodernist relativism. Indeed, exponents of post¬
modernism have included disproportionate numbers of migrants and exiles.



264 Change and Continuity


Globalization has also promoted postmodernist thought through the tech¬
nologies of supraterritorial communications. For example, mass media news
reports have often involved obvious manipulations of ‘facts’. After all, the
story depends largely on where the camera is pointed. Computer-generated
‘virtual realities’ have likewise blurred lines between fact and fiction. Indeed,
by increasing communication through images as opposed to verbal
exchanges, global relations have perhaps given more reign to ‘irrational’
unconscious associations in human thought (Lash, 1990: ch 7).

In addition, globalization has encouraged the rise of postmodernist episte¬
mology through consumer capitalism. The consumerist mindset is oriented
more to ephemeral experiences than to fixed facts. As a way of knowing the
world, consumerism (through shopping, tourism, etc.) gives greater weight to
sensation than to science. Also, against instrumentalist logic, consumerism
accords higher priority to gratifying desires than to solving problems.

All of this said, the novelty and power of postmodernist epistemologies in
contemporary society should not be overestimated. Like religious revivalist
movements, relativist philosophies date back well before the onset of acceler¬
ated globalization. The nineteenth-century nihilism of Friedrich Nietzsche
gives but one prominent example. Moreover, to this day fully fledged post¬
modernist thought has figured mainly on the margins of social life. The over¬
whelming majority of academics, entrepreneurs, officials and civil society
organizers have so far stuck with a predominantly rationalist orientation.


Reflexive rationalism

Thus, in spite of various important challenges, rationalist knowledge has
retained primacy in contemporary times of growing global relations, yet this
prevailing epistemology has not come through the twentieth century
unchanged. In particular, modern rationality has in recent history often
become more reflexive.

A number of sociologists have invoked the term reflexivity to describe
rationalist thought that is acutely self-conscious, self-searching and self-criti¬
cal (Beck, 1994; Giddens, 1994). Reflexive rationalists ‘think about what
before they did unthinkingly’ (Smart, 1999: 33). Reflexivity brings less confi¬
dence in rationalist knowledge claims and reduced faith in the modern project
of perpetual progress through the application of human reason.

Reflexive rationalism is still rationalist. It rests on long-standing core tenets
of secularism, anthropocentrism, scientism and instrumentalism. However,
reflexivity takes away the conviction element: modern knowledge is no longer
taken for granted. Thus many modernist thinkers today, while still regarding
rationalism as the most promising epistemology currently available, have also
recognized its limitations and flaws. With this attitude, reflexive rationalists
have tended to be less dismissive of alternative knowledges and more ready to



Globalization and Knowledge 265


experiment with different epistemologies (for example, in unconventional
approaches to health care).

Indeed, reflexive rationalism and postmodernism overlap at points. Like
postmodernists, reflexive rationalists view knowledge as uncertain and
contingent. Also like postmodernists, reflexive rationalists see that modern
reason can have harmful outcomes, for instance, in the form of
military-industrial complexes and ecological degradation.

However, the two epistemologies also part ways. In particular, postmod¬
ernists regard rationalism as irredeemable and actively pursue alternative
epistemologies, whereas reflexive modernists conclude that, for all its limita¬
tions, rationalism is still the best game in town and indeed can be reformed.
In the latter vein Andre Gorz has called for a ‘rationalization of rationality’,
and Ulrich Beck has prescribed a ‘new modernity’ of more self-critical and
self-limiting science (Gorz, 1988: 1; Beck, 1986). Thus reflexive modernists
seek a regeneration of rationalism in forms where it does not promote ills
such as centralized power and the suppression of cultural diversity. In
contrast, postmodernists doubt that rationalism is susceptible to such correc¬
tions.

Reflexive rationalism is not completely new to recent history, of course. A
sceptical bent has been intrinsic to modern rationality from the outset.
Science has constantly questioned and perpetually revised knowledge in the
light of new information and analysis. To be modern is in part to ‘stand
outside’ of and critically reflect upon one’s being.

Yet the self-monitoring aspects of rationalism have gained unprecedented
intensities in contemporary history. Anthony Giddens has in this light char¬
acterized the current situation as one of ‘high modernity’ marked by extreme
reflexivity (1991: 28-9). In these circumstances people have become less
trusting of science and technology. Thus, for example, current times are
replete with food scares and calls for greater spirituality in modern life. Even
many professional scientists have retreated from claims to hold objective
facts and full truths: the scepticism of science has turned upon science itself
(Beck, 1986:155). In an‘age of relativization’(Sakamoto, 1997), the enlight¬
ened are questioning their Enlightenment. Modernists are questioning
modernity.

Globalization has not been the only force behind the growth of reflexive
rationalism, but this rearrangement of social space has encouraged this turn
in knowledge in several ways. For one thing, much as with the spread of post¬
modernism, the rise of globality has promoted heightened reflexivity by
intensifying intercultural encounters. Transplanetary travel, supraterritorial
communications, and transworld marketing of artefacts such as Rastafarian
music and certain alternative therapies have made rationalists more aware
that the world contains a plurality of knowledge systems, each with its own
internal coherence. For many people the posited hierarchy of ‘reason’ over



266 Change and Continuity


‘folk wisdom’ has become more qualified in consequence. Also querying ahis-
torical objectivism, the philosopher Sandra Harding has asked, ‘Is science
multicultural?’, a question that few if any people would have thought to pose
50 years ago (Harding, 1998).

Computer technologies at the heart of globalization have also injected
uncertainties into the rationalist project. On the one hand, digital computers
have enabled people to access much more information and to manipulate it
faster and in more complex ways. These capacities have often advanced the
rationalist cause of subordinating natural and social forces to human inter¬
ventions. On the other hand, computers have also generated far more data
than human minds can effectively monitor and control. Furthermore, contin¬
ually advancing digitization brings the prospect of increasingly sophisticated
artificial intelligence that operates with relative autonomy from human deci¬
sion. Already, for instance, self-monitoring computer programmes have
contributed to ‘irrational’ runs on currencies and stock markets.

As these undesirable outcomes of electronic finance illustrate, globaliza¬
tion can encourage greater reflexivity insofar as transplanetary relations have
produced harms that call into question the rationality of rationality. Other
examples include the destructive potential of global weapons, the damage of
anthropogenic global ecological changes, and the cruelty of liberalized global
markets for vulnerable social circles. Such threats (which are elaborated in
Part III) have prompted many rationalists to reflect that modern rationality
can sometimes be the problem rather than the solution.

To repeat, however, reflexivity marks a shift within rather than a change
of knowledge structure. In reflexive rationality, ‘reflexive’ is the adjective and
‘rationality’ is the noun. Although reflexive rationalists may show greater
openness to alternative knowledges than traditional ‘conviction rationalists’,
they remain rationalists. ‘High modernity’, if one accepts that label for
present-day society, is still modernity.

Giddens and others have sometimes spoken of ‘high modernity’ as being
also ‘late modernity’. This characterization intimates that reflexive rational¬
ism could mark the start of a transition to some kind of postmodern know¬
ledge. Indeed, as noted above, reflexive and postmodernist epistemologies do
have some notable overlap. Yet it seems too early to draw the further impli¬
cation that increased reflexivity is taking rationalism toward the historical
exit door.

On the contrary, it is well to remember that much rationalism in the early
twenty-first century has not acquired a heightened reflexive character. There
is still plenty of evangelical scientism about. Many a manager bows before the
shrine of productivity, and many an economist kneels at the temple of effi¬
ciency. Many people - in particular the majority of those in positions of
power - still regard science and technology as the salvation of our earthly
lives. Globalization has (so far) not on the whole displaced that faith.



Globalization and Knowledge 267


Ontology

Next to its effects on epistemology, globalization has also contributed to
some important turns in other aspects of knowledge. Several of these deve¬
lopments relate to ontology, that is, the broad way that people define ‘reality’.

All groups and individuals hold particular conceptions of the entities and
relationships that constitute their world. Key ontological concerns include
the character of God (if any), life, self, society, time and space. Notions of
such conditions form a backdrop to, and shape, every thought and purpose¬
ful action, even if people may only rarely express these ideas explicitly. Shifts
in mental constructions of elementary realities may also occur so subtly as to
be little noticed.

Ontologies vary by sociohistorical context; so the question arises whether
contemporary globalization has promoted any changes in this respect. To
some extent, all of the developments described in earlier chapters involve
adjustments of assumptions about reality as well as shifts in concrete circum¬
stances. However, the key ontological changes at the heart of globalization
relate to understandings of space and time.

Space

As noted in Chapter 2, a number of social thinkers from different disciplines
have in the context of globalization redefined geography in postterritorialist
terms. The present book adds to that trend. To the extent that these academic
articulations of revised notions of space strike a chord in lay circles, the
accounts are expressing a broader ontological shift in ideas of place.

Different conceptions of space have indeed emerged in wider circles than a
cluster of social theorists. As noted in Chapter 3, an awareness of globality
has in recent history become commonsense for a notable proportion of
humanity. The sociologist Roland Robertson has in fact defined globaliza¬
tion as a growth in ‘the scope and depth of consciousness of the world as a
single place’ (1992:183). The different conception of space elaborated in this
book will resonate with far more readers today than it would have done 50
years ago.

Current widespread talk of ‘virtual reality’ seems a revealing illustration of
an adjusted ontology. People recognize that globally conveyed images on
computer and television screens are ‘real’; yet these electronic depictions do
not fit conventional understandings of geographical ‘reality’. People are
therefore prompted to construct alternative, postterritorialist definitions of
space, in order to restore a fit between their understandings and their experi¬
ences. The mediated picture becomes as ‘real’ as the directly observed scene.
With such an ontological shift people move cyberspace and other global
realms from fantasy to actually lived reality.



268 Change and Continuity


However, this shift to a postterritorialist understanding of space is far
from complete. Many people at the start of the twenty-first century still
equate ‘space’ and ‘geography’ with ‘territory’. Perhaps global maps convey¬
ing supraterritorial realities will one day be as commonsense to people as
territorial maps have been in modern history. Then it would no longer be
necessary, as in this book, to express postterritorialist ontology with constant
references back to old terminology, that is, invoking notions of supra territor¬
iality and d eterritorialization. The vocabulary of globality would at this point
be able to stand on its own.

Time

Contemporary globalization has gone to the heart of conceptions of time as
well as space. As noted in Chapter 2, supraterritoriality involves a qualitative
change in space-time relations insofar as it dissolves the connection (within
the confines of planet Earth, at least) between time and distance.
Transplanetary instantaneity has brought the advent of globally unifying
‘real time’.

In this situation, people living more globalized lives are less inclined to
think of time with reference to distance. For example, inhabitants of a more
global world do not, as in many earlier contexts, understand a day in terms of
the time it takes to travel to the next village or some other destination. In addi¬
tion, the hour has today lost its once close connection (in many countries)
with the railway timetable.

Globalization has tended to shift the ontology of time from a link with
distance to a connection with speed. For example, air passengers are usually
more conscious of how fast they are travelling than how far they are going. In
respect of fax and email, people are more concerned with the speed than with
the distance of communications: it is not how far correspondents have to
respond, but how quickly they answer. In global production the issue of how
swiftly suppliers can deliver (‘just in time’) often has little to do with how far
they have to deliver. By putting greater stress on speed in these and other
ways, globalization has contributed to a general acceleration of the experi¬
ence of life.

In addition, globalization has tended to heighten people’s sense of over¬
crowded time. By removing the buffers previously afforded by distance,
supraterritorial connections have allowed ever more activity to descend on a
person’s time. For those who lead intensely globalized lives, a day becomes a
deluge of telephone calls, emails, channel hopping between radio and televi¬
sion transmissions, electronic money transactions, and charges down airport
concourses. In a word, life becomes more hectic.

Excessive global time arguably carries significant costs for the quality of
life. In this vein Sohail Inayatullah and Ivana Milojevic have worried about



Globalization and Knowledge 269


‘temporal impoverishment’ in ‘a world of quick inattentive time . . . where
data and information are far more important than knowledge and wisdom’
(1999: 77). Indeed, the combination of faster and busier time in highly glob¬
alized lives can present substantial coping challenges. In this regard it is prob¬
ably little accident that stress and supraterritoriality have grown concurrently
in contemporary history. Indeed, like notions of ‘globalization’, the concept
of ‘stress’ has in recent decades spread to countless languages across the
planet.


Methodology

Along with epistemology and ontology, methodology is a third area of
knowledge where globalization might have effects. Methodology refers to the
manners in which knowledge is built: that is, the ways that questions are
asked; and the principles and procedures of inquiry that are used to answer
the questions posed. Methodology involves issues both of general approach
to knowledge construction and of specific research tools.

Globalization has not had significant impacts on several core method¬
ological issues in social inquiry. For example, concerning the agent-structure
question (discussed in Chapter 1), globalization has not prompted a mass
conversion of voluntarists into structuralists, or vice versa. Likewise, the
spread of transplanetary relations has not turned materialists (those who root
social causation in economic and/or ecological processes) into idealists (those
who explain social relations in terms of cultural and/or psychological forces),
or vice versa. Increased globality has not induced general changes of perspec¬
tive on the relationship between facts and values; neither has the rise of
transworld connectivity altered views on the links between theory and prac¬
tice. These methodological issues (explored at greater length in Scholte,
1993) are not directly affected by the shape of social space. Thus globaliza¬
tion is a new subject of study around which long-running debates about
methodology can be replayed (Taylor et al., 1996; Germain, 1999; Shaw,
1999). However, the expansion of global spaces has not changed the balance
in these arguments, let alone resolved them.

That said, contemporary intense globalization has arguably had some
consequence for several other methodological issues. As elaborated below,
these impacts have related to the role of academic disciplines, to processes of
teaching and learning, and to the nature of empirical evidence.


Disciplinarity

The growth of global problems has accentuated the need to transcend conven¬
tional academic divides when undertaking social inquiry. Some theorists have



270 Change and Continuity


called for ?««te'disciplinarity in studies of globalization, where researchers
from several fields each contribute their respective approaches to a joint
investigation. Others have appealed for greater mterdisciplinarity, where
researchers take the additional step of integrating principles and tools from
different fields of study. Some academics have gone still further and argued
for post-disciplinarity, namely, the creation of substantively new methodolo¬
gies that do not rely on separated fields of study. The so-called ‘world-system
approach’, associated especially with the work of Immanuel Wallerstein,
provides one example of post-disciplinarity (Wallerstein, 1991).

The rise of transplanetary relations has contributed to some retreats from
discipline-bound research inasmuch as academic divides have often
hampered rather than advanced knowledge of transworld relations. Global
communications, global economic restructuring and global ecological degrad¬
ation are among various contemporary issues that can be only partially - and
often but poorly - understood through single disciplines. Little wonder, then,
that recent history has seen the emergence of interdisciplinary enterprises
such as Business Studies, Media Studies, International Political Economy,
and Environmental Sciences. The US Committee on the Human Dimensions
of Global Change has concluded that ‘the need to understand global change
may well become a powerful force for change in the existing structure of
scientific disciplines’ (Stern, 1992: 33). Likewise, several world-system theo¬
rists have cited globalization as a justification for their post-disciplinary
approach to social enquiry (Taylor etal., 1996).

However, recent moves away from disciplinarity must not be overplayed.
So far, exhortations to transcend the old academic divides have well exceeded
actual multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary and post-disciplinary research
practices. Like contemporary social inquiry in general, most studies of global
issues have drawn from a single field. Several transdisciplinary academic
journals for the study of global problems have appeared, such as Global
Networks, Global Social Policy, and Globalizations-, yet most professional
research continues to be published through discipline-related organs.
Similarly, most academic conferences have remained tribal conclaves on
disciplinary lines. Most research funding has continued to flow through disci¬
plinary channels, and adherence to disciplinarity normally still provides
professional academics with a faster track to promotion than alternative
approaches. In short, some minor inroads aside, disciplinary methodology
remains quite firmly entrenched in the contemporary globalizing world.


Teaching and learning

Other methodological shifts promoted in part through globalization have
related to education processes (Breton and Lambert, 2003). For example, the
growth of global publishing has meant that millions of schoolchildren and



Globalization and Knowledge 271


older students now acquire part of their learning from transworld textbooks.
A number of (mainly US- and UK-based) academics, including Paul
Samuelson in Economics, Kenneth Waltz in International Relations, and
Anthony Giddens in Sociology, have in this way become global teachers.

Several colleges and universities have embarked on transworld franchising
of entire courses. For instance, Monash University in Melbourne has
marketed its programmes in standardized packages throughout Asia
(Waters, 1995: 172). Several UK-based institutions have embarked on simi¬
lar enterprises. In addition, universities can - thanks to air transport, faxes
and the Internet - use academics in different countries or continents as exter¬
nal examiners for their programmes. At secondary-school level the
International Baccalaureate (IB) has emerged as a global diploma: it draws
from no country and is recognized across continents.

Meanwhile mass air travel has in recent history facilitated large increases
in study abroad activities. Children from wealthier circles in the North can
today expect at least one school trip overseas as part of their secondary educa¬
tion. Hundreds of thousands of university students in the North have
completed a period of study abroad, albeit that complications of credit trans¬
fer and grade conversion often still arise. At postgraduate level a few institu¬
tions have begun to experiment with transworld programmes, where
students spend different parts of their course in different countries or conti¬
nents. The Universitas 21 initiative has linked institutes of higher education
in several countries to offer global degrees.

Other ‘distance learning’ has developed on ‘virtual campuses’ via televi¬
sion and computer networks. For instance, the Open University in Britain, the
Tele-Universite in Quebec, and Item/Seis in Mexico have delivered pre¬
recorded lectures and demonstrations to their students via television.
Countless other teachers have used the Internet as a classroom tool, with
websites at least partially displacing books and journals as source material.

Indeed, technologies at the heart of contemporary accelerated globaliza¬
tion have substantially broadened the character of literacy. In many lines of
work the ability to use computer applications has become as important as the
ability to read and write with paper and pen. In addition, television, film and
computer graphics have greatly enlarged the visual dimensions of communi¬
cation. Many people today ‘read’ the globalizing world without a book.
Sociologists Scott Fash and John Urry have in this regard contrasted a ‘liter¬
ary paradigm’ of modernism with a ‘video paradigm’ of postmodernism
(1994: 16). In a world suffused with electronic mass media, journalists,
advertisers and disk jockeys have come to rank among the principal teachers.

Finally, the growth of transplanetary spaces has spurred the development
of English as a global lingua franca (Pennycook, 1994). Esperanto, the delib¬
erately designed transplanetary language, has only attracted a few million
speakers worldwide. In contrast, English is now spoken by 1.7 billion people



272 Change and Continuity


across the earth (BT, 2000: 10), including many who have never set foot in a
country to which English is native. One might even distinguish a ‘global dialect’
of English, namely, the version that is spoken in tourist resorts and professional
conferences. This ‘global English’ uses vocabulary and turns of phrase that have
little currency on the streets of Glasgow, Brisbane and Omaha. More critically,
Mary Snell-Hornby suggests that this ‘free-floating lingua franca. .. has largely
lost its original cultural context, its idioms, its hidden connotations, its gram¬
matical subtleties, and has become a reduced standardised form of language for
supra-cultural communication’ (2000: 17). The globality of English has
spawned several diplomas such as TOEFL (Teaching of English as a Foreign
Language) and has raised the Cambridge Proficiency Examination to a
transworld standard. At the same time, native speakers of English have found it
increasingly easy to get by in the world without learning other languages.


Evidence

While widening the scope of literacy, globalization-promoting technologies
have also enlarged the amounts and types of empirical evidence that are avail¬
able to researchers. Air travel, telecommunications and computer networks
have enabled investigators to gather data in no time from any and all corners
of the planet. An era of global research has dawned (at least for those who can
obtain the required funding).

The Internet in particular has changed the character of research.
Increasingly, academic writings (like the present book) include references to
online sources. No longer is a ‘document’ limited to hard-copy sheets with
static, monochrome text. In some ways the Internet approximates the ‘world
brain’ that H. G. Wells anticipated many years ago as ‘an efficient index to all
human knowledge, ideas and achievements ... a complete planetary
memory’ (1938: 60, his emphasis).

Digital information processing has also enabled researchers in the
contemporary globalizing world to handle much greater quantities of data.
Large-scale number crunching and bulging bibliographies have become the
order of the day. Whether greater wisdom has resulted is another matter, of
course. In the so-called ‘information age’ it is arguably often harder to see the
wood for the trees.

In sum, then, when it comes to methodology globalization has: (a) created
greater urgency to abandon narrow disciplinary studies; (b) altered some
aspects of education processes; and (c) increased amounts of empirical mater¬
ial and broadened the ways that researchers handle evidence. Yet these
developments have not, in a deeper structural sense, substantially altered the
kinds of knowledge that result from academic endeavours or from learning
generally. As noted earlier, rationalism has remained the prime order of the
day in global knowledge, if perhaps tinged with greater reflexivity.



Globalization and Knowledge 273


Aesthetics

What, finally, of aesthetics? Has globalization affected prevailing apprecia¬
tions of beauty or, to put it another way, the ways that people know art? As
the next paragraphs indicate, beauty has exhibited some different facets in
transplanetary spaces. However, older ideas of what constitutes art have not
disappeared in the process.

To begin with, globalization has helped certain art forms to obtain
transworld currency. Electronic mass media and global markets in particu¬
lar have promoted some kinds of music, dance, film, dress and cuisine to the
top of fashion across all continents. Ronaldo’s turns on the football pitch,
Andy Warhol’s images, and tinted-glass office blocks have become trans¬
planetary marks of beauty, unconnected to any specific country and appre¬
ciated (in some circles, at least) the world over. That said, increased globality
has, in the vein of greater reflexivity, given many contemporary artists more
awareness of the diversity of viewpoints from which art is received (Poissant,
2004).

Much as globalization has encouraged greater hybridization in collective
identities, as discussed in Chapter 7, so transplanetary spaces have also
provided increased possibilities for intercultural combinations in the arts. For
example, an Indian sitarist has linked up with an American guitarist to
produce a new variant of jazz (if it can still be called that). An evening’s enter¬
tainment in a global city can readily encompass an Ethiopian meal, a Russian
play, and transport by Korean car with Canadian pop music on the stereo. In
Berlin, home to people from 181 countries, Multikulti radio has issued
broadcasts in 19 languages (Velea, 1996). Beauty has thereby increasingly
lain in melanges as well as in the ‘purity’ of traditions.

Moreover, the growth of transplanetary connections has contributed to
the creation and spread of certain new forms of beauty. For instance,
computer-generated images and global brand symbols have often fallen
outside pre-existent categories of art. Global relations have also tended to
endow speed with beauty, inter alia in the sensation of jet travel, the pulse of
electronic music and the flurry of still motion on television and cinema
screens.

Together, these three trends in art - of importations, combinations and
new creations - have arguably brought greater diversity and flexibility to
appreciations of beauty. David Harvey has on these lines described ‘the
ferment, instability and fleeting qualities of a postmodernist aesthetic that
celebrates difference, ephemerality, spectacle, fashion, and the commodifica¬
tion of cultural forms’ (1989: 156). On the other hand, contemporary times
of globalization have also witnessed many a traditionalist reaction against
new turns in the arts.



274 Change and Continuity


Conclusion

So, as with production, governance and identity, globalization has had a
number of repercussions for knowledge (summarized in the box). In regard to
epistemology, increased globality has encouraged several anti-rationalist reac¬
tions as well as promoted greater reflexivity within rationalism. With respect
to ontology, spreading globality has involved some shifts in conceptions of
space and time. In terms of methodology, the growth of transworld networks
has furthered some altered approaches to research, teaching and learning. As
for aesthetics, globalization has advanced some different experiences of
beauty. From all of these angles the reconfigured geography has encouraged
greater pluralism and contestation in the construction of knowledge.


Implications of globalization for knowledge in
summary

Epistemology

• global relations have largely reproduced rationalist knowledge

• increased transplanetary connectivity has in some ways also encour¬
aged anti-rationalist reactions such as religious revivalism, ecocentrism
and postmodernism

• globalization has promoted a growth of reflexive rationalism

Ontology

• growing globality has entailed altered conceptions of space

• supraterritorial relations have shifted experiences of time

Methodology

• global issues have intensified the need for multi-, inter- and post-disci¬
plinary modes of inquiry

• many educational tools and programmes have gained transplanetary
circulation

• supraterritorial spaces have raised the importance of visual literacies

• English has increasingly become a transplanetary medium of communi¬
cation

• technologies of globalization have generated greater quantities and
different qualities of empirical evidence

Aesthetics

• transplanetary relations have facilitated the worldwide spread of
certain forms of art

• globalization has encouraged increased hybridization in art

• transworld spaces have helped to produce new types of art




Globalization and Knowledge 275


However, thus far, respatialization through globalization has on the
whole affected the margins more than the core of knowledge power struc¬
tures. Rationalist epistemologies have retained primacy in global flows and
contemporary social relations generally. Discipline-based methodologies
have continued to thrive under accelerated globalization, and most shifts in
education practices have affected form more than content. New types of art
have in general supplemented rather than displaced the old. Knowledge has
witnessed considerable creative ferment in the current globalizing world, but
on the whole the reigning primary principles of understanding have not radi¬
cally altered.

This general conclusion of mixed change and continuity has applied
throughout Part II of this book. The preceding four chapters have succes¬
sively identified important shifts in production, governance, identity and
knowledge that have accompanied the respatialization of social life through
globalization. To this extent contemporary globalization has certainly not
marked ‘the end of history’. On the other hand, contemporary globalizing
circumstances have also been marked by underlying continuities: of capital¬
ism, of bureaucratism, of communitarianism, and of rationalism. To this
extent proclamations that globalization involves epochal transformation to a
wholly new era seem misplaced, or at least premature.



Part III


Normative and Policy Issues



Having elaborated a concept of globalization, having traced the historical
course of the trend, having examined its causes, and having traced the conse¬
quences of this respatialization for parallel and interrelated social structures,
this book now has a substantial base from which to assess the costs and bene¬
fits of the new geography. What has been going right and what has been going
wrong in the past decades of intense globalization? Who has been winning
and who has been losing from the trend, and in what ways ? In the light of such
a balance sheet, has the rise of transplanetary connectivity to date been a good
and/or a bad thing? Inasmuch as globalization has caused harms, what
corrective measures might be taken?

This book examines these normative and policy questions around three
main themes: human security, social equality, and democracy. The next chap¬
ters examine these three broad questions in turn. Chapter 9 considers the
implications of expanding globality for human security: that is, the types and
levels of safety and confidence that people do and do not experience in soci¬
ety. Chapter 10 assesses the repercussions of recent decades of intense glob¬
alization for social equality: that is, the forms and intensities of arbitrary
hierarchies between people (in terms of class, country, gender, race,
urban/rural divides, and age). Chapter 11 explores the consequences of
spreading transplanetary relations for democracy: that is, the ways and
degrees that people are able to take policy decisions regarding the globalizing
circumstances that affect their destinies.

In respect of each of these headline themes contemporary globalization is
found to have yielded both positive and negative outcomes. As a critical intro¬
duction, this book places greater emphasis on the downsides, particularly as
they are largely avoidable. In other words, the harms have resulted not from
increased globality as such, but from the policies that have been adopted
towards it.

Chapter 12, on future globalizations, then considers what alternative poli¬
cies might be available to counter the insecurities, inequalities and democra¬
tic deficits that have flowed from currently prevailing (that is, mainly
neoliberalist) approaches to globalization. It is argued that contemporary
social forces and political constellations present severely limited prospects for
rejectionist and full-scale transformist strategies in the short and medium
term. However, a host of practicable ambitious reforms could make the glob¬
alizing world a more humane place within the next few decades.


278



Chapter 9

Globalization and (In)Security

Main points of this chapter

Peace

Crime

Ecological integrity

Health

Poverty

Financial stability

Employment

Working conditions

Identity

Knowledge

Social cohesion

Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• globalization has had important repercussions for various facets of
human security: military, ecological, physiological, economic, psycho¬
logical and cultural

• on all of these dimensions contemporary globalization has had both posi¬
tive and negative consequences

• in each case globalization has not been the sole source of human
(in)security, but one of multiple interrelated factors

• negative impacts of contemporary globalization on human security have
generally resulted not from the growth of transplanetary connectivity as
such, but from the policies (often along neoliberalist lines) that have been
adopted toward the trend


AIDS, GM, CFCs, LTCM, ICBMs, SARS, 9/11, Y2K. Much of the shorthand
of today’s more global world resonates of insecurity. Contemporary public
discourse, particularly through the mass media, is replete with threats, scares,
crises and emergencies. Some sociologists have in this light described the
present circumstance as a ‘risk society’ (Beck, 1986,1999), and ‘human secu¬
rity’ has become a popular policy buzzword (CHS, 2003).


279




280 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Often people have drawn associations between this heightened vulnerabil¬
ity and increased globality. Many have endorsed the sentiments of Suwan
Mingkwan and Tern Tarat, fisherfolk near the Thai-Lao border, when they
proclaim that ‘globalization is a chaos and creates a disaster’ (Mingkwan and
Tarat, 2002). Problems of human security have thereby fuelled much unease
about, and protest against, current globalization.

However, does the historical coincidence between globalization and
greater experiences of danger and risk also entail a causal relationship? In
what ways and to what extents has recent full-scale globalization undermined
- or on the contrary perhaps enhanced - people’s safety and confidence?
Absolute security is of course not available, as every human situation carries
uncertainties and exposures. The challenge is to maximize the potential bene¬
fits and minimize the possible problems of globalization for human security.
What does the record to date suggest?

Many of today’s headline insecurities have readily evident connections
with globality. Some of these misfortunes strike suddenly, like aeroplane
crashes, nuclear accidents, financial crises, terrorist assaults, computer
viruses, and globally spread physiological diseases. Other insecurities with
links to globalization carry on from day to day, such as transworld crime,
global warfare, purported ‘floods’ of immigrants, job insecurity in a global
economy, and worries about a so-called ‘race to the bottom’ of social and
environmental protections. Then there are longer-term global risks of harm
like those associated with the tobacco trade, HIV/AIDS, mobile telephones,
biotechnology, nanotechnology, climate change, natural resource depletion,
and cultural destruction.

In addition to these substantive problems, globalization also has links to
human insecurity at a deeper structural level. As an ongoing major reconfig¬
uration of social geography, the rise of transplanetary relations has under¬
mined many of the former securities connected with the certainty and
predictability of one’s place in the world. As seen in Part II, contemporary
globalization and the growth of supraterritoriality have unsettled previously
familiar terrains of production, governance, identity and knowledge. The
new geography has in many ways disturbed previous, relatively clear, and
largely unquestioned social bearings in terms of territorialist economy, statist
governance, nationalist identity, and rationalist knowledge. The resultant
intensified sense of a loss of ties and groundedness has arguably contributed
to a general environment of increased human insecurity.

On the other hand, contemporary globalization has in various respects
also enhanced human security. For example, transplanetary connections
have facilitated emergency relief activities and peacekeeping missions.
Globalization has also encouraged heightened ecological sensitivity and (in
some cases) greater economic efficiency. As suggested in Chapter 7, a number
of groups such as indigenous peoples and sexual minorities have arguably



Globalization and (In)Security 281


gained greater security of identity in a postnationalist era. Hence, as ever with
globalization, there are multiple sides to the story.

Moreover, it should be remembered that human security is not an object¬
ive fact, but rather an interrelation of the material (i.e., concrete conditions)
and the ideal (i.e., perceptions and understandings of those situations).
Hence, for example, a constant barrage of press reports of threats arguably
heightens the sense of vulnerability even if the actual incidence of harmful
events remains unchanged. Paradoxically, many people today have felt
increased risk at a historical moment when technological developments have
provided unprecedented means to control danger.

(In)security is also experienced differently - and with regard to different
priority issues - depending on the social context involved. As repeatedly
stressed in this book, globalization does not entail simple universalization
and homogenization; thus people in the contemporary globalizing world
have experienced different vulnerabilities to different extents in different
contexts. For example, the destitute of Sri Lanka have not focused on dangers
of climate change, while IT millionaires have rarely if ever worried about
threats of malaria. Similarly, Rwandans and US-Americans have been rela¬
tively unaffected by each other’s respective experiences of genocide and 9/11.
Politics generally decides which insecurities obtain greatest attention and
response, who is secured, and who does the securing.

The rest of this chapter assesses connections between contemporary glob¬
alization and multiple issues of human security. In turn the sections below
consider questions of peace, crime, ecological integrity, health, poverty,
financial stability, employment, working conditions, identity, knowledge,
and social cohesion. Given its character as ‘a critical introduction’, the
present account often puts particular emphasis on the downsides of global¬
ization for security to date. The vulnerabilities associated with the contemp¬
orary growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial links have indeed been
great. These ills are the more regrettable insofar as many of them could be
substantially reduced. In other words, the problems for human security have
generally resulted not from globalization as such, but from the particular
policies (often in a neoliberalist vein) that have so far been adopted towards
the trend. As Chapter 12 elaborates, different strategies of globalization
could yield greater security.


Peace

As noted in Chapter 6, contemporary globalization would seem to discourage
warfare insofar as armed conflict between states for control of territory serves
little purpose in respect of most supraterritorial concerns and interests. In
those parts of the world where globalization has gone furthest, governments



282 Nonnative and Policy Issues


face - and are to a considerable degree dependent on - powerful trans¬
planetary markets and communications networks whose operations would
be greatly disrupted by military adventures. In addition, as seen in Chapter 7,
many citizens - including significant elements of elite circles - have developed
commitments to global issues and attachments to global communities, ties
that make them less disposed to support old-style armed campaigns to
conquer territory.

Thus it is arguably in part (albeit not only) owing to large-scale globaliza¬
tion that the OECD states have not gone to war against each other since 1945.
Military conflict between states of East Asia, Europe and North America also
seems unlikely in the foreseeable future. To this extent there is some cause to
applaud a correlation between globalization and greater peace.

In addition, the growth of suprastate governance in the context of global¬
ization has brought some greater possibilities of arms control and disarma¬
ment. For example, a number of multilateral treaties (some with regional
scope and others with transworld coverage) have restricted the testing and
deployment of nuclear warheads. The nuclear non-proliferation treaty
regime, established in 1968 through the IAEA, has discouraged (albeit not
with total success) the spread of nuclear weapons to more state arsenals. At
the end of 2003 a total of 158 states had ratified the Chemical Weapons
Convention of 1993, administered since 1997 through a permanent
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW, 2004).
Global controls have also advanced for biological weapons and landmines.
The transworld campaign against landmines in particular has demonstrated
that substantial popular support can be mobilized for tighter control of
global production and trade of arms (Price, 1998; Mekata, 2000).

Suprastate governance has also opened up new means of conflict manage¬
ment. Since the 1950s the UN has developed so-called peacekeeping opera¬
tions in inter-state conflicts, and in the 1990s the organization substantially
expanded humanitarian assistance in civil wars as well (Weiss et al., 1994;
Minear and Weiss, 1995). True, some of these efforts have had limited
success, and proposals to create UN peace enforcement units have thus far
not borne fruit. However, important positive UN contributions to conflict
limitation have been made, for example, in Cambodia, Cyprus and Namibia.
Meanwhile regional governance bodies like the Organization of African
Unity (OAU - now African Union) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe have undertaken conflict management initiatives in
their respective areas. Global humanitarian NGOs have often assisted both
transworld and regional official agencies in alleviating the harms of war.

Yet contemporary globalization has not in every respect reduced the
dangers of armed violence. For one thing, inter-state warfare has persisted in
the contemporary more global world outside the North. Recent decades have
witnessed several military conflagrations between states, including Vietnam



Globalization and (In)Security 283


and Cambodia, Iran and Iraq, Ecuador and Peru, Eritrea and Ethiopia.
Indeed, global reach with ‘rapid reaction forces’ and the like has facilitated
military interventions by states of the North into conflicts in the South and
the East. The US government in particular has despatched armed forces to
Afghanistan, the Balkans, the Caribbean, Central America, West Africa, the
Horn of Africa, and the Persian Gulf. Territorial interests still drove the
Argentine and British governments to war over the Falklands/Malvinas in
1982. Nor has half a century of large-scale globalization ended the state of
war on the Korean peninsula, where the will for territorial reunification
under a single nation-state has persisted, irrespective of South Korea’s deep
involvement in transworld relations.

Meanwhile, as mentioned earlier, widespread micro-nationalist and reli¬
gious revivals encouraged in part by globalization have promoted a substan¬
tial rise in intrastate warfare outside the North. The many instances have
included Afghanistan, Angola, Congo/Zaire, Georgia, Indonesia, Russia, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, and former Yugoslavia. In total, recent wars in the South
(mostly intrastate) have cost some five million civilian lives. Many of the
weapons that wrought these casualties have emanated from the global arms
trade. Efforts to halt illicit shipments of small arms and light weapons have
had limited success. In addition, global diasporas have on a number of occa¬
sions injected considerable financial backing for civil wars in their countries
of origin.

Even ‘peace’ between major states since the mid-twentieth century has
prevailed under a spectre of destruction such as people have never before
experienced. In spite of the end of the Cold War, and even after implementa¬
tion of existing disarmament agreements, a handful of states still possess
enough nuclear warheads to eliminate the entire human race. A
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in respect of nuclear weapons was signed in
1996; however, the US Senate’s subsequent refusal to ratify prevented imple¬
mentation of the agreement. Global weapons such as fighter jets, ballistic and
cruise missiles, and spy satellites have sown insecurity in the target popula¬
tions, whether or not those tools have been used in actual raids. In addition,
the holders of such weapons have lived with a constant anxiety that prospec¬
tive enemies could acquire similar capabilities - or worse, develop still more
sophisticated technologies for global attacks.

The technologies of globalization have also been closely interlinked with
militarization in other ways. For example, the telephone was used on the
battlefield within two years of its invention (Young, 1991: 49). Likewise,
supraterritorial connections by radio and laser have acquired important mili¬
tary purposes. Computer networks were first developed in the US armed
forces in 1969 and have become a key tool of contemporary warfare for major
states. Future military operations involving powerful states could well focus
on invading computer systems as much as on occupying territorial domains.



284 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Globalization has furthered warfare in non-technological ways, too.
Global finance largely paid for the Gulf War of 1990-1, whose oil fires also
provoked a major global ecological scare at the time. Global companies have
figured prominently in the production of military equipment. Global organi¬
zation has featured in military alliance structures such as NATO, in armed
violence pursued by global criminal networks, and in the transworld activi¬
ties of various terrorist bodies.

Indeed, global terrorism has figured as a prominent source of insecurity since
the 1970s. Terror politics are not new, insofar as various state and non-state
actors have long used campaigns of fear, death, disruption and destruction to
promote their causes; however, intensified globalization has given terrorists
new tools and higher profile (Booth and Dunne, 2002; Gunaratna, 2002;
Mackinlay, 2002). Global news media coverage of a bombing or a hostage
seizure has allowed both large military divisions and small guerrilla cells to
obtain immediate worldwide publicity. Attacks on aeroplanes, airports, cruise
ships, embassies, corporate offices, Olympic Games and other venues of glob-
ality have made particularly spectacular impacts. Global trade in weapons has
supplied many of the means for terrorist acts, while global finance has often
channelled the necessary funds. Certain individual terrorists have lived as
global itinerants, while global communications have enabled terror units across
the planet to exchange information and coordinate operations.

In short, globalization and the rise of supraterritoriality in no way inher¬
ently reduce military and paramilitary threats to human security. Indeed, it is
conceivable that general warfare between major states could recur in spite -
or even because - of globalization. As is elaborated in further sections below,
adjustment to global relations can produce many harms in terms of ecologi¬
cal damage, increased poverty, job losses, deterioration of working condi¬
tions, cultural destruction and social fragmentation. In certain circumstances
such heightened insecurities could encourage a return of large-scale inter¬
state warfare. On this count, too, equations of globalization and peace could
prove to be dangerously complacent.


Crime

Next to war, multiple further worries of violence in contemporary society
have related to crime. Indeed, many if not most people in today’s world expe¬
rience crime as a more immediate and intense threat than warfare. Criminal
violence in fact currently kills three-quarters of a million people across the
world per year, so broadly equivalent to numbers of military casualties.
However, in what ways and to what extent is insecurity from crime related to
globalization?

Certainly global relations have often provided contexts for criminal activity.



Globalization and (In)Security 285


Thus, for example, the Internet has proved a boon for many fraudsters and
paedophiles. Global finance has greatly enhanced opportunities for money
laundering, which now stands at levels equivalent to 2-5 per cent of world
GDP per annum (FATF, 2004). Criminal elements have also often exploited
transplanetary trade at a time when only 4 per cent of shipping containers are
inspected. Many gangs have dealt globally in restricted goods (like culturally
protected art), prohibited goods (like illicit drugs), taxed goods (like ciga¬
rettes), stolen goods, and undocumented migrants.

Indeed, transworld criminal networks have figured as a powerful form of
global organization in contemporary history. Prominent examples include
the triads of China, drug barons of Latin America, and some oligarchs of
Russia. Several of these criminal circles have moreover been embedded in
global diasporas. One leading authority on the subject has gone as far as
declaring that organized crime could be the largest beneficiary of globaliza¬
tion. For example, the Colombia-based Cali cartel ranks as the most success¬
ful ‘global corporation’ in the South, generating $6 billion per annum in
revenue and $3 billion in profit (Williams, 2000).

To be sure, expanded global spaces have also created new opportunities
to combat crime. The significance of transstate judicial cooperation was
mentioned in Chapter 6. In addition, Interpol has operated as a global
governance agency to pursue lawbreakers across the planet since 1923
(Anderson, 1989). New information technologies have increased possibil¬
ities for transworld tracking of criminals. A Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) based at the OECD has worked since 1989 to counter money
laundering with strengthened state regulation and closer multilateral
cooperation (Reinicke, 1998: 156-72; Wiener, 1999: ch 3). In general,
however, people today sooner associate globality with more crime rather
than less.


Ecological integrity

Along with avoidance of war and crime, security in a more global world also
depends crucially on maintaining a viable relationship between people and
their natural surroundings. It goes without saying that human life requires
certain atmospheric, hydrospheric, geospheric and biospheric conditions.
Humanity needs breathable air, potable water, arable soil, and sustainable
coexistence with other life forms.

Thanks in good part to global ecological challenges and global initiatives
to meet them, environmental issues have risen to considerable prominence on
the contemporary security agenda. Countless civil society groups, companies,
media organs, official agencies and research institutes have since the 1960s
put the spotlight on environmental questions as never before. On the whole,



286 Nonnative and Policy Issues


this greater sensitivity has tended to heighten awareness of ecological risks
and to foster a general atmosphere of insecurity.

True, some technologies associated with globalization - like telecommun¬
ications, digital data processing, and satellite surveillance - have provided
highly sophisticated tools for anticipating natural disasters and monitoring
ecological trends. On the other hand, many technologies of globalization
have also been highly polluting. Aeroplanes have dirtied the skies, and the
motor ships that support global trade have dirtied the seas. Much of the elec¬
tricity to run global communications has been generated with nuclear and
fossil fuels whose by-products contaminate air, land and sea. Contrary to
some expectations, computers have tended in practice to increase rather than
decrease paper use, thereby adding pressure on forests. Rapid turnover in
global consumer goods has added massively to non-degradable solid waste,
however well intentioned recycling activities might be. Meanwhile spent
rockets and satellites have started a further junkyard in outer space.

Global capitalism has often undermined ecological security in other ways,
too. For instance, some companies (especially producers of toxic substances
like pesticides and heavy metals like zinc) have ‘gone global’ in part to relo¬
cate at sites where environmental regulations are less stringent (Heerings and
Zeldenrust, 1995: ch 4). Some have exaggerated the extent of ‘pollution
havens’ and a ‘race to the bottom’ of environmental standards in poorer
countries, but these problems have figured significantly in some situations
(Mani and Wheeler, 1998; Neumayer, 2001; Clapp, 2002). Global trade in
toxic wastes (so-called ‘pollution flight’) has also posed dangers for popula¬
tions in the South. One source on ‘garbage imperialism’ has calculated that
firms made over 500 attempts between 1989 and 1994 to export a total of
more than 200 million tons of waste from the OECD countries to the South
(Bellamy Foster, 1994). Likewise, as governments in the North have
restricted or banned a number of tobacco products, pharmaceuticals and
pesticides, global marketing has enlarged outlets for many of these goods in
the South and the East. Global lending, too, has sometimes promoted envi¬
ronmental degradation as, for example, governments have intensified
exports beyond sustainable levels in order to obtain foreign exchange earn¬
ings for debt repayment (Miller, 1991). Likewise, certain ministries in the
South have abandoned environmental projects and policies in an effort to
achieve fiscal targets connected with globally sponsored structural adjust¬
ment programmes (Reed, 1996). In spite of a proliferation of ‘socially respon¬
sible investment’ schemes, few bankers and brokers have adjusted their
global financial activities to promote greater ecological integrity (Bouma et
al., 2001; Durbin and Welch, 2002).

Meanwhile each of the major anthropogenic global environmental
changes of contemporary history has presented threats (imminent and/or
long term) to ecological integrity. Transboundary air pollution could, it is



Globalization and (In)Security 287


feared, destroy forests and lakes. Nuclear accidents and thinned ozone yield
the spectre of increased cancer rates. Declining biological diversity might take
the earth to a species depletion threshold beyond which the entire biosphere
would collapse; recent losses have already cost some 10-15 per cent of species
on earth (Speth, 2001). Rising sea level associated with climate change could
submerge highly populated coastal areas and small island countries. Large-
scale contamination of soil and freshwater could threaten human subsistence.

Given such prospects, the emergence of global social ecology has, not
surprisingly, produced a succession of popular scares. For example, rapid
growth in world population led in the late 1960s to widespread fears of a
‘time bomb’. The global oil crisis of the 1970s fed worries of an impending
exhaustion of many vital natural resources. Further anxiety has accompanied
the spread of genetically modified foodstuffs through the transworld markets
of agribusiness and biotechnology firms. In a word, then, global environ¬
mental issues have become a prime source of insecurity, particularly among
people who face few direct economic and military threats.

To be sure, as mentioned in Chapter 6, global governance of ecological
matters has made some notable advances. Whereas the UN Charter made no
mention of the environment in 1945, UN-sponsored global summits on the
environment at Stockholm (1972), Rio de Janeiro (1992) and Johannesburg
(2002) have raised awareness of the problems among official circles and the
general public. In terms of concrete progress, the ozone regime established
through the 1985 Vienna Convention and the 1987 Montreal Protocol has
proved particularly successful. By 1997 world production of the main ozone-
depleting substances had fallen to 76 per cent of the 1988 level (Edwards,
2004: 22). Meanwhile the Global Environment Facility (GEF) - operative
since 1994 and administered between UNDP, UNEP and the World Bank -
has pledged some $2 billion to help poor countries make investments that
benefit ecological integrity. That said, when spread across a decade and
across the entire planet, the GEF sum is pretty modest in relation to the chal¬
lenges at hand.

More generally, too, the advances of global environmental care must not
be exaggerated. Efforts to address global warming have proved especially
frustrating, as implementation of the 1992 Framework Convention on
Climate Change has proceeded with painful slowness. Various proposals
have circulated for carbon taxes and other ‘clean development mechanisms’,
but half a dozen UN conferences since 1992 on climate change have yielded
limited concrete results. Indeed, refusals by the Chinese and US governments
to ratify the 1997 Kyoto Protocol have severely undercut this key attempt to
set legally binding limits on emissions of greenhouse gases.

As for connections between global commerce and environmental degrada¬
tion, the Doha Declaration of 2001 for the first time promised that a future
cycle of trade liberalization talks would deal specifically with environmental



288 Nonnative and Policy Issues


issues. However, it is not yet clear when such a ‘green round’ of WTO nego¬
tiations might take place. Nor has general backing yet developed for a World
Environment Organization that would work on a par with the WTO and
other global governance agencies (Newell and Whalley, 1999; Biermann,
2000 ).

Hence at least some of the ecological insecurities associated with contemp¬
orary globalization can be attributed to laissez-faire policies rather than to
the fact of transplanetary connectivity itself. Many global relations are
polluting, but others do not have to be, and suitable global regulations can
promote ecological integrity, not lower it. The primary indictment for envi¬
ronmental degradation should therefore be addressed to neoliberalism as a
particular kind of globalization and not to globality as such.


Health

Like global ecological issues, global health problems have generated consid¬
erable insecurity in recent decades (Garret, 1994; NIC, 2001; Lee etal., 2002;
Lee, 2003; Pirages, 2006). Global transmission of diseases via people and
produce has triggered a succession of popular panics since the 1980s.
Transplanetary travel has greatly accelerated the spread of HIV/AIDS and,
more briefly, SARS. AIDS induced 20 million deaths worldwide by 2001
(leaving over 10 million orphans), while more than 40 million other people
are currently living with the disease (Barnett and Whiteside, 2002; Poku and
Whiteside, 2002). Mainly as a consequence of AIDS, average life spans are
declining by 20-40 years in a number of countries of Sub-Saharan Africa.
Owing to global trade rules, most AIDS sufferers have lacked access to the
more effective drug treatments. Meanwhile, the global food trade has
diffused BSE across the planet, with the associated human risk of variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).

Globalization has also complicated health problems that do not attract the
media spotlight. Lor example, greater global mobility has increased the
spread of older illnesses like cholera, malaria and tuberculosis. Global
markets in alcohol, asbestos, junk food, tobacco, and various other licit and
illicit drugs have raised numerous health risks across the planet. ‘Race to the
bottom’ arguments have suggested that global commercial competition can
undermine health and safety standards for workers (Lustukian et al., 2002).
Onerous global debts have undercut public spending on primary health care
in dozens of poor countries since the 1980s. Global migration has facilitated
the movement of thousands of health professionals, often away from places
of the greatest need to the more lucrative working conditions of medically
privileged areas.

To be sure, some of the problems just mentioned have developed due to the



Globalization and (In)Security 289


policies adopted towards globalization rather than as a consequence of
greater transplanetary connectivity per se. Thus, for instance, debt and struc¬
tural adjustment in poor countries can be handled in ways that do not so
greatly compromise public health expenditures. In addition, more proactive
global regulation could reduce or halt trade in products detrimental to health.
For example, agreement was reached in 2003 through the WTO to improve
poor countries’ access to essential medicines, though it is as yet unclear how
far the rather complicated provisions can be effectively implemented.

Indeed, when taken in certain directions globalization can also enhance
human health. For instance, global communications media have upgraded
the knowledge and practice of health care for professionals and laypersons
alike. Telemedicine (the provision of health advice through telecommunica¬
tions) has improved health services and reduced the need for referrals.
Although their power can be abused and their profits can be excessive, global
pharmaceutical companies have provided many positive health treatments.
From the side of charity, global philanthropists like the Gates and Rockefeller
Foundations have sponsored major programmes to better health, for exam¬
ple, through the large-scale provision of children’s vaccines. Global civil soci¬
ety has contributed to health improvement with relief agencies like Medecins
sans frontieres (MSF), consumer groups like Health Action International
(HAI), and other advocacy bodies like the International Women’s Health
Coalition. The promotion of ‘health for all’ has also been a primary aim of
several (unfortunately poorly financed) global governance agencies, includ¬
ing the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Fund
for Population Activities (UNFPA), and the WHO. In 2001 the G8 set up a
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria, although this initiative has to
date fallen far short of its target budget of $10 billion per year. Transstate
collaboration among national health authorities has also helped to share
knowledge and coordinate policy responses.

In sum, it is not possible to make a blanket denunciation or endorsement
of the health effects of globalization. As with peace, crime and ecology, the
balance sheet on globalization and health is mixed. Certainly major harms
can arise in the absence of carefully crafted public policies. To this extent the
problems have lain in the laissez-faire attitudes of neoliberalist globalization
rather than globalization as such.


Poverty

Along with debates over peace, crime, ecology and health, some of the most
intense arguments about globalization and human security have concerned
poverty. On the one hand, neoliberalists have promised that laissez-faire
globalization will yield material prosperity for all humanity (Dollar and




290 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Kraay, 2000). Reformists and transformists have countered that globaliza¬
tion conducted on neoliberalist lines sustains or worsens poverty, whereas
alternative approaches to transplanetary connectivity could improve matters.
In contrast, rejectionists have dismissed any form of globalization as detri¬
mental for the poor. What does the evidence of past decades suggest?

To begin with, assessments of the poverty effects of globalization confront
huge problems of definition and indicators. After all, subsistence require¬
ments are not transculturally and transhistorically fixed. Determinations of
the nature and amounts of basic needs vary considerably by context.
Minimum living standards are different in Siberia as against Sumatra, or in
1840s Ireland as against the present day. Moreover, poverty is a subjective as
well as an objective condition. For example, many people whose material
survival is assured may nevertheless feel poor because they perceive them¬
selves as having far fewer resources than the average person in their society.
Given these complexities of definition, it is difficult to compile statistics of
any reliable precision for global poverty. Per capita GDP and daily income are
generally recognized to be inadequate indicators, but these crude measures
are often used nevertheless in the absence of straightforward alternatives.

Indeed, much of the debate about rising or falling poverty in the contemp¬
orary globalizing world has revolved around this kind of unsatisfactory
data. For example, a lot of attention has gone to World Bank figures regard¬
ing the number of people across the planet who live on less than the equiva¬
lent of $1 per day. Neoliberalists have seized upon the suggestion that, even
with major world population growth, this total dropped from 1.4 billion
persons in 1980 to 1.2 billion in 2001. However, critics have argued that the
methodologies used in these calculations changed over this period, so that the
figures cannot be safely compared (Wade, 2002).

Yet a number of other measures have also suggested declines in world
poverty during the contemporary period of accelerated globalization. For
example, in terms of UNDP’s Human Development Index (HDI), the propor¬
tion of the world’s population living in destitution more than halved between
1960 and 1992 (HDR, 1994: 1-2). In absolute numbers, more people
escaped from poverty in the second half of the twentieth century than in the
preceding 500 years (HDR, 1997: 2). The ranks of the indigent in China
declined by more than half between 1978 and 1985, and from 280 million in
1990 to 125 million in 1997 (Rohwer, 1992: 4; AP, 1999b). In the South,
home to most of the world’s poor, average life expectancy lengthened by 17
years between 1960 and the mid-1990s (FT, 2 February 1996: 1). Child
mortality for under-5s fell from 196 per 1000 live births in 1960 to 82 in 2002
(UNICEF, 2003b: 105). The proportion of one year-olds immunized rose
from 70 per cent in 1990 to 89 per cent in 1997, while malnutrition decreased
from 177 million children in 1990 to 150 million in 2000 (Globe and Mail, 6
May 2002: A8). Adult illiteracy in the South declined from nearly 60 per cent



Globalization and (In)Security 291


in 1970 to 35 per cent in 1994. The share of the world’s population with
access to safe water rose from 40 per cent in 1990 to 72 per cent in 1997
(DFID, 1997: 13; HDR, 1999: 22). Advances of these kinds have been espe¬
cially pronounced in so-called ‘newly industrializing countries’ in parts of
East and South East Asia and Latin America.

Nevertheless, poverty remains a major problem in the twenty-first century
world. It is safe to say that several billion people today subsist on the most
marginal of earnings. As of the mid-1990s around a seventh of humanity (828
million people) was chronically malnourished (FAO, 1998). There were 880
million illiterate adults across the world in 1998 and 113 million children out
of school in 2000 (UNESCO, 2000: 8,11). Most countries of the South have
not become NICs. In fact 70 lands experienced no increase in per capita
income between 1980 and the mid-1990s, and 43 countries had a lower per
capita income in the mid-1990s than in 1970 (HDR, 1996: 1). The scale of
poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa was as great in the mid-1990s as in the mid-
1960s (UNCTAD, 1995: 11). In addition, certain so-called ‘transition coun¬
tries’ of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union experienced striking
increases of poverty in the 1990s. Life expectancy actually declined in seven
of these countries after 1989 (HDR, 1999: 79). Meanwhile slum residents in
Chicago’s South Side have endured deprivations alongside the shack dwellers
of Lima’s favelas. Between the early 1980s and the mid-1990s, child poverty
rose by a third in the USA and by half in Britain (Jolly, 1995). It increased in
Canada from one in seven children in 1989 to nearly one in five in 1999
(Globe and Mail, 7 May 2002: A8).

If poverty has in some ways decreased, in other ways increased, and in any
case remained a significant problem during recent times of large-scale global¬
ization, to what extent have these trends resulted from globalization? How
far can the improvements and/or continuing difficulties be attributed to the
growth of transplanetary and supraterritorial connectivity? Statistics are
inconclusive, although some general connections can be discerned.

In terms of global trade, most of the NICs have prospered in a context of
significantly increased exports of global goods and services. To take the most
outstanding case, the gross national product (GNP) of China tripled between
1978 (the year of ‘opening up’ to global commerce) and 1993. On the other
hand, global markets in primary commodities have on the whole given the
poor countries that most rely on these exports steadily declining terms of
trade since the 1970s (Coote, 1996). Indeed, world prices of primary
commodities in the mid-1990s stood at their lowest level since the 1930s (ul
Haq et al., 1995: 29). Moreover, a study by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) has concluded that the world’s 48
poorest countries would collectively lose $300-600 million per annum as a
result of reduced exports and increased food imports under the Uruguay
Round agreements (Went, 1996: 126). In addition, trade liberalization has



292 Nonnative and Policy Issues


deprived many poor states of one of their chief sources of tax revenue
(namely, customs duties), thereby increasing the squeeze on public-sector
programmes for poverty reduction. Given this mixed evidence, even main¬
stream economists are now divided about the welfare consequences of trade
liberalization (McCulloch et al., 2001).

Global finance has also had some unhappy impacts on poverty. In principle
one might hope that a global pool of savings could provide unprecedented
levels of poverty-reducing investments. However, all too often ‘development’
has worked for global finance rather than, as one would hope, the other way
around. Nowhere has this maldistribution of resources occurred more
blatantly than in global loans to poor countries. The transworld debts of the
South grew sixteen-fold between 1970 and 1997, to nearly $2.2 trillion, and
little of this sum appears to have helped poor people. Most of the $1.3 trillion
in increased debt between 1980 and 1994 involved an accumulation of unpaid
interest rather than fresh credits (Childers, 1994:10; World Bank, 1994:192).
By 1996, 41 of the world’s poorest countries between them had accumulated
some $250 billion in global debts, a burden that severely limited their govern¬
ments’ capacities to attack poverty. In Latin America during the debt crisis of
the 1980s, the ranks of indigent people expanded from 130 to 180 million
(Bello et al., 1994:52). By now even the most hard-nosed bankers concede that
the debt burdens of many poor countries are unsustainable and have damag¬
ing impacts on vulnerable sectors of their populations. However, in spite of
multiple debt relief programmes since the late 1980s - with partial debt cancel¬
lation, long-term rescheduling, and interest rate reductions - most of the coun¬
tries concerned remain saddled with crippling debts. Much was expected from
the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative (HIPC) introduced by the IMF
and the World Bank in 1996 and enhanced in 1999. However, this relief too
has proved small, slow and grudging. Long and dogged efforts by global devel¬
opment campaigners to address the debt burdens of the South have borne
much less fruit than hoped. Indeed, far more money was mobilized far more
quickly to rescue the Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) hedge fund in
1998 than has been garnered to support the HIPC initiative.

The general volatility of global financial markets has also adversely
affected the poor. In Indonesia, for example, concerted efforts reduced the
number of destitute people from 70 million (60 per cent of the populace) in
1970 to 25.9 million (13.7 per cent of the populace) in 1993. However, the
Asia crisis of 1997-9, induced largely by developments in global capital and
currency markets, may have put up to 130 million people in Indonesia in
poverty by early 1999 (AP, 1999a). Similarly, vulnerable social circles in
Thailand and Argentina suffered from collapses of the baht and the peso in
global currency markets in 1997 and 2001, respectively.

More generally, too, macroeconomic adjustments to a more global econ¬
omy have, when followed on neoliberalist lines, often brought cuts in public



Globalization and (In)Security 293


services to poor people. For example, although average incomes have risen
substantially in China since 1978, access to social protections has not.
Likewise, a number of governments in the North (especially those in the
‘Anglo’ countries) have reduced certain welfare provisions at least partly in
the name of enhancing global competitiveness. Particularly during the 1980s
and early 1990s, structural adjustment policies sponsored in the South and
the East by the IMF and the World Bank often cut substantially into social
security programmes. A study by the ILO has suggested that if governments
would return to earlier social policies, world poverty in terms of people living
under $1 per day would decline by a third from 1.2 billion to 0.8 billion
(Hoeven, 2002). In fact the Bretton Woods institutions have since the mid-
1990s increasingly incorporated social safety nets into their recommended
macroeconomic packages. In the Asia crisis of 1997-9 the two bodies more¬
over departed from their traditional fiscal conservatism to condone substan¬
tial public-sector deficits, with a view to protecting food security, primary
health care, basic education and employment.

Indeed, poverty eradication has over the past decade become a headline
theme of global policy. In 1999 the Bretton Woods agencies made ‘poverty
reduction’ their explicit foremost priority in regard to countries of the South.
Following this line, the World Bank’s subsequent World Development
Reports have regularly highlighted problems of the poor (World Bank, 2001,
2004). At the United Nations Millennium Summit in 2000, some 150 govern¬
ments committed themselves to reach eight Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) of significant poverty reduction by 2015 (UN, 2000; HDR, 2003).
Likewise, the Commission on Human Security and the World Commission
on the Social Dimension of Globalization have put the spotlight on poverty
concerns (CHS, 2003; WCSDG, 2004). The ILO has launched a Global
Campaign on Social Security and Coverage for All, against the current situa¬
tion where less the 10 per cent of people in poor countries have access to
statutory social insurance and social assistance.

However, for the most part it remains to walk the talk. The United Nations
declared a succession of ‘development decades’ starting in the 1960s to little
avail. In practice most OECD states have diminished their levels of overseas
development assistance (ODA) to poor countries. Per capita aid to the ‘least
developed countries’ declined by nearly a third in the second half of the
1990s. Since 2002 African governments have attempted to revive ODA with
the so-called New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), but it
remains to be seen whether this scheme will attract significant donor support.

Although global trade, finance and governance agencies have in the above-
mentioned ways worked to perpetuate and sometimes deepen poverty, it
would of course be mistaken to attribute these difficulties entirely to global¬
ization. After all, local social structures, country policies, natural calamities
and other forces have also had their negative impacts. Moreover, it might not



294 Nonnative and Policy Issues


necessarily be globalization per se so much as the approaches adopted
towards globalization that generate the problems. The adverse effects noted
above are a matter of policy, not geography. Neoliberalist globalization may
have worsened the lot of many poor people, but (as explored further in
Chapter 12) alternative policies could build up the poverty-alleviating poten¬
tials of global relations.


Financial stability

If the connections between contemporary globalization and poverty are hotly
debated, few dispute that the considerable volatility of global financial
markets has had some damaging consequences for human security. As seen in
Chapters 3 and 5, expanded globality has made far more finance capital
available far faster for investment across the planet. However, the sums and
speeds of transactions have also - particularly in a context of liberalization
and deregulation - carried greater risks of large and rapid movements in the
values of currencies, securities and derivatives.

Some degree of instability is inherent in capitalist financial markets.
Indeed, fluctuations can sometimes encourage greater economic efficiency, as
investors perpetually look out for higher returns. However, problems arise
when rumour, herd behaviour, computer-automated trading and the like
generate inordinate short-term movements in the prices of financial instru¬
ments. Moreover, full-scale crises in currency, stock, bond and derivative
markets can spill over to harm the wider economy with disruptions to bank¬
ing, trade, fiscal balances, consumer spending, and employment.

Global finance of the past three decades has involved considerable insta¬
bility. The debt crisis of the South mentioned above called the solvency of a
number of major commercial banks into question in the 1980s and has
saddled dozens of low- and medium-income countries with damaging fiscal
and wider economic burdens ever since. Major stock and bond market
collapses in the chief global financial centres in 1987, 1994 and 2001
substantially undermined general economic confidence. Wild swings in
global foreign exchange markets and short-term capital flows have helped to
trigger financial crises in Britain, Italy and Sweden in the early 1990s, Latin
America in 1994-5, Asia in 1997-8, Russia in 1998, Brazil in 1999, and
Argentina and Turkey in 2001. The string of debacles in derivatives markets
include the Metall Gesellschaft and Orange County affairs in 1994, Barings
in 1995, Sumitomo in 1996, and Long Term Capital Management in 1998.
More recently, accounting scandals in major global corporations such as
Enron, WorldCom, Ahold and Parmalat not only put their own shares in
freefall, but also undermined confidence in the integrity of stock markets
more generally.



Globalization and (In)Security 295


These volatilities in global financial markets have heightened insecurity
among the world’s wealthy and poor alike. Many savers have anxiously
watched their investments from hour to hour on televised tickertape. This
environment of pervasive unease has generated a new ‘science’ of financial
risk management, with some practitioners grouped in a Global Association of
Risk Professionals. Meanwhile, as already stressed, the reverberations of
global financial crises have often afflicted poor people in resultant general
economic downturns and structural adjustment programmes.

Insecurities born of global finance have prompted some regulatory
responses. Regarding transworld banking, for example, the Basle Committee
on Banking Supervision at the Bank for International Settlements has issued
multiple recommendations, guidelines and standards since its establishment
in 1974. Prominent among these measures is the Basle Capital Accord - first
adopted in 1988 and subsequently modified several times - which has
provided a framework for assessing the capital position of banks as they
engage in large-scale global lending (Wood, 2005). In 1997 the Basle
Committee moreover published a set of Core Principles for Effective Banking
Supervision with global applicability (BIS, 1997). Meanwhile the BIS
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, established in 1990, has
monitored the integrity of computer technologies used in global banking.
Since 2000 an International Association of Deposit Insurers has sought to
promote best practice in the protection of account holders.

Mainly since the 1990s, a number of other suprastate and private govern¬
ance initiatives have aimed to increase stability in global finance beyond
banking. The International Organization of Securities Commissions, the
International Association of Insurance Supervisors, the OECD Committee on
Financial Markets, the WTO Committee on Financial Services, the BIS
Committee on the Global Financial System, the International Securities
Market Association and the Group of 30 have between them developed a host
of principles and standards for transworld foreign-exchange, securities,
derivatives and insurance markets. Since 1996 the Basle Committee, the IAIS
and IOSCO have coordinated a Joint Forum on Financial Conglomerates
that enhances cooperation among banking, insurance and securities supervi¬
sors (given that global financial companies have increasingly operated across
the three sectors). On the initiative of the G7, a Financial Stability Forum was
established among major state and multilateral authorities in 1999 ‘to
promote international financial stability, improve the functioning of
markets, and reduce systemic risk’ (FSF, 1999).

Other measures have sought to increase disclosure and transparency of
relevant statistics, on the premise that global financial markets will be less
prone to panics if investors have access to more (and more reliable) informa¬
tion. To this end the IMF established a Special Data Dissemination Standard
in 1996 and a General Data Dissemination System in 1997. In 1999 the



296 Nonnative and Policy Issues


International Federation of Accountants, the IMF and the World Bank
launched an International Forum on Accountancy Development that aims to
build accounting and auditing capacity in countries of the East and the South.
Meanwhile the International Accounting Standards Board has formulated
transworld standards on accounting specifically for financial instruments
(Bryant, 1999:22).

Yet such modest initiatives have to date not brought adequate levels of
stability to global finance. Fligh market volatility has continued to generate
intense insecurity. The rapid succession of debt, currency, securities and
derivative crises through the 1980s and 1990s finally provoked greater
discussion towards the end of the century about major reforms of the so-
called ‘global financial architecture’ (Blinder, 1999; Bond and Bullard,
1999; Eichengreen, 1999; Bryant 2000; Eatwell and Taylor, 2000). There
was even, briefly, some high-level talk of convening a new Bretton Woods¬
like conference in order to overhaul global financial governance institutions.
However, as the crisis of the late 1990s receded, the prevailing approach
quickly shifted back to one of incremental adjustments to liberalized
markets. Even the United Nations initiative on Financing for Development
(FfD), launched in 1997, has largely sidestepped questions of proactive
public regulation to attain greater financial stability (Herman, 2002;
Langmore et al., 2002).

Indeed, with finance as with ecology and poverty, the problems of insecur¬
ity relate largely to the policies followed (often of a neoliberalist kind) rather
than to globality per se. Alternative regulatory strategies could bring more
acceptable levels of stability to global finance. These possibilities are explored
in Chapter 12.


Employment

On top of poverty and finance, much discussion of connections between glob¬
alization and economic security has focused on questions of employment.
This is hardly surprising, given that work is central to the human condition,
with major implications for health, material welfare, personal identity and
social cohesion. The following paragraphs assess the consequences of global¬
ization for the availability of jobs, while the next section examines the reper¬
cussions of globalization for working conditions.

Champions and critics of globalization alike agree that unemployment
constitutes a major challenge for the twenty-first century. According to UN
estimates, the world labour pool of 2.8 billion people in the early 1990s
included about 800 million unemployed (120 million of them officially regis¬
tered as such) and over 700 million underemployed (Simai, 1995: 4). Apart
from the NICs, most countries in the South have suffered dire shortages of



Globalization and (In)Security 297


opportunities for waged labour. The end of central planning has also brought
large-scale unemployment to the so-called ‘transition countries’. Meanwhile
countries in the North have moved from effective full employment in the
1960s to persistent unemployment (often in double-figure percentages) since
the 1980s. Many more wage earners (estimated at 15 million across the
OECD countries in 1994) have endured involuntary part-time employment
(ILO, 1995). Concurrently, a large proportion of workers in the North have
experienced continual worries about their job security in the short or medium
term. Even corporations in Japan have since the early 1990s abandoned their
traditional commitment to lifelong employment for their staff. Across the
North the goal of full employment has largely disappeared from macro-
economic policy.

However, are these unhappy trends of the past 30 years a result of the glob¬
alization that has transpired at the same time? As noted in Chapter 1, the
impact of globalization on employment opportunities has attracted many
claims and counterclaims. Proponents suggest that the contemporary global¬
izing economy has created new jobs and could in the longer term provide
waged work for all. In contrast, critics argue that globalization has generated
huge job losses and eliminated the possibility of full employment.

As ever with globalization, the situation is more complicated than sound¬
bites would have it. Certainly it is overly simplistic to attribute all unemploy¬
ment problems to increases in transplanetary connectivity. For example, a
host of new labour-saving technologies like digital computers and robotics
have produced large staff cuts since the 1970s irrespective of globalization.
‘Jobless growth’ in many manufacturing and service industries has seen
production rise while employment levels fall. Other unemployment has
occurred when prospective workers have lacked the required education and
training. This question of skills, too, is largely independent of changes in
social geography. In short, any rejectionist proposition that de-globalization
would in and of itself yield jobs for all should be treated with scepticism.

Indeed, the balance sheet on globalization and employment opportunities
has shown some positive entries. For example, service industries such as retail
trade, finance, communications, and information technology have signifi¬
cantly expanded their payrolls in recent decades. As seen in Chapter 5, these
sectors have lain at the heart of global capitalism. Meanwhile global enter¬
prises in these and other sectors have often created new jobs at their host sites.
By 1992 transworld corporations directly employed some 29 million people
outside their country of origin (ILO, 1995). Countless other workers have
indirectly gained a livelihood from FDI, that is, through subcontracting and
other services to global firms.

However, the job-creating effects of contemporary globalization have
remained modest on the whole. As of the late 1990s, over 800 EPZs across the
world had between them generated only 27 million jobs (HDR, 1999: 86).



298 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Total increased employment in the South from exports to global markets
averaged less than 700,000 new jobs per annum over the 30-year period from
1960 to 1990, thus only a fraction of concurrent population increases
(Wood, 1994: 13). As of 1992, global companies collectively employed only
73 million people, amounting to less than 6 per cent of the overall world
payroll (ILO, 1995: 45). Meanwhile, the expanding financial, information
and communications sectors of global capitalism have generally required
smaller labourxapital ratios than older extractive and manufacturing indus¬
tries. For example, with its payroll of 15,000 the global IT giant Microsoft
has employed far fewer people than the largest manufacturers of earlier
generations.

In certain other ways contemporary globalization has had positively detri¬
mental effects on employment security. In particular, some job losses have
occurred in the North when firms have exploited the possibilities of globality
to move their production facilities to low-wage sites in the South and the East,
particularly in the NICs and in EPZs. Such relocations are estimated to have
reduced demand for unskilled labour in the North by some 6-12 million
person-years between 1960 and 1990 (Wood, 1994: 11). The trend has
continued since 1990 as, for example, commercial liberalization through the
WTO and regional trade agreements has further encouraged transfers from
the North of various manufacturing operations, as well as some service indus¬
tries like call centres. In a survey of 10,000 firms in Germany in 1993, one in
three respondents said that they planned to transfer production to Eastern
Europe or Asia in order to take advantage of lower labour costs and environ¬
mental standards (Axford, 1995: 118).

That said, it would be mistaken - as some commentators have done - to
exaggerate the connections between job losses in the North and job gains else¬
where in a global economy. As noted earlier, ‘lost jobs’ in the OECD coun¬
tries have often gone not to the South and the East, but to machines.
Moreover, many global enterprises have established facilities in the South
and the East not as a relocation strategy from the North, but as an expansion
strategy in order to produce locally for new markets. Also, many of the 29
million jobs directly attributable to inward FDI have appeared in the North
rather than the South or the East (when, for example, a Japan-based company
has invested in the European Union).

In any case, in other respects global mobility has cost the South and the East
dearly on the labour front, especially through the so-called ‘brain drain’. For
example, Africa alone has been exporting 60-70,000 professionals per year.
To the extent that the resultant capacity gaps in the South are filled, it has
mainly come through the import of expensive consultants from the North.

On another front, globalization has contributed to substantial job losses in
the context of corporate mergers and acquisitions. In the global pharmaceu¬
ticals sector, for instance, the fusion of Glaxo and Wellcome saw the payroll



Globalization and (In)Security 299


shrink by 11 per cent, while Pharmacia and Upjohn closed 40 per cent of
plants in the course of their merger (FT, 5 March 1996:23; 7 March 1996:1).
When Chase and Chemical Banks merged, 12,000 people became redundant
(FT, 1 April 1996: 23). As seen in Chapter 5, M&amp;A activities have prolifer¬
ated in good part as a response to global market competition and consolida¬
tion.

Contemporary globalization has further encouraged greater unemploy¬
ment insofar as the massive growth of finance capital has shifted much
investor interest from job-creating projects in the ‘real’ economy to financial
instruments as objects of investment in their own right. Debt instruments,
equities and currency speculation have enticed investors with promises of
high and fast returns. By comparison, investment in more labour-intensive
‘real’ production has in contemporary capitalism tended to yield lower pro¬
fits over a longer term. True, casino capitalism has generated some expansion
of payrolls in the financial sector. However, today’s banking, securities and
derivatives businesses are largely automated, and mergers in the sector have
brought substantial job losses in a number of firms. In any case, the extra
employment created through the expansion of finance capital has probably
been considerably smaller than the job growth that could be had were invest¬
ments to be placed in ‘real’ production.

Finally, globalization has often undermined job security in the context of
structural adjustment programmes. Most of these policy packages agreed by
governments with multilateral financial institutions have prescribed a signif¬
icant contraction of the civil service. In most cases no accompanying
measures have redeployed the redundant officials in new jobs. Likewise,
privatization and liberalization policies at the heart of neoliberalist structural
adjustment have often brought job losses when local trade and industry are
exposed to global competition. Proponents of conventional structural adjust¬
ment programmes have argued that rejuvenated market forces will correct
these problems with expanded employment opportunities in the medium and
long term. However, little evidence has as yet emerged in the South and the
East to substantiate this claim.

Taking the various points above in sum, contemporary globalization has
on balance had more negative than positive effects on employment opportun¬
ities. To be sure, the positive impacts should not be overlooked, and the
unhappy consequences should not be exaggerated. Nor has globalization
been the sole cause of growing underemployment in recent history.
Nevertheless, globalizing capitalism has thus far reduced the certainty of job
tenure for most people in work, and the new geography has to date come
nowhere close to generating the positions needed to address structural
deficits in world opportunities for waged employment.

However, as with other issues of human security, the problems with
employment have lain less with the rise in transplanetary links per se



300 Nonnative and Policy Issues


and more with the ways that this trend has been (mis)managed. The prevail¬
ing neoliberalist spirit of the day has tended to treat job losses and high levels
of unemployment as temporary pains that global free markets will in time
redress. In this environment of laissez-faire, global employment policy has
not developed much beyond platitudes emanating from occasional high-level
meetings like the G7 Jobs Summits at Detroit in 1994 and Lille in 1996 or the
UN World Summits for Social Development in 1995 and 2000.


Working conditions

Accelerated globalization in contemporary history has affected not only the
opportunities for waged employment, but also the conditions of that work.
As ever in globalization debates, analysts have disagreed on the nature of this
impact, with some emphasizing the positive and others the negative. Indeed,
the record has been mixed. On the plus side, for example, some global compan¬
ies have offered workers in the South higher wages and larger benefits than
local employers. However, other effects on labour conditions have been strik¬
ingly detrimental, and not enough has been done to mitigate and avoid these
harms.

Prior to the present period of large-scale globalization, many waged work¬
ers in many parts of the world had obtained improved labour conditions
through the state. In the East, workers made significant gains under state
socialism. In the North, workers benefited from the welfare state. Trade
unions held considerable power vis-a-vis the state in much of Latin America.
Even some colonial administrations introduced greater labour protections in
their later years.

Contemporary globalization has tipped the political balance substantially
against workers. Global mobility of capital has not been matched with
commensurate global mobility of labour, thereby considerably boosting the
bargaining position of employers towards employees. Capital can move
about the planet in search of profit-maximizing labour arrangements, while
workers (especially less skilled workers) are far more bound to territorial
place and much more constrained to accept the terms that this location offers.
Moreover, global business lobbies have been much more strongly organized
than global trade unions. Compare, for instance, the influence of corporate
bodies and labour groups on WTO negotiations. Not surprisingly, therefore,
the globalization of production has not been matched with an equivalent
globalization of worker protections. The guarantees secured thus far for
labour through contemporary polycentric governance have generally been
weaker than the conditions obtained for workers in the later period of statist
governance.

To put the point in Gramscian terms, neoliberalist globalization has been



Globalization and (In)Security 301


a key force in the decline of the so-called ‘Fordist’ social contract. Fordism
developed, particularly in countries of the North, from the 1910s and peaked
between the 1940s and the 1960s. It rested on an implicit trilateral pact
between government, corporate business and organized labour. For their
part, large trade unions delivered acquiescent and more productive workers
to business. On its side, corporate business delivered higher wages, benefits
and protections to workers. Completing the triad, the state delivered union
protection and wide-ranging social welfare to workers as well as guarantees
of property rights and various services to business. With these arrangements,
Fordism produced ‘the affluent worker’ who had sufficient income and
leisure time to consume mass-produced goods. To be sure, the fruits of
Fordism were restricted to a minority of the world’s workers: unionized white
men in the North were the prime beneficiaries. Moreover, the labour in ques¬
tion often involved tedious assembly-line work. Nevertheless, Fordism
marked a notable advance over earlier social contracts and held out the
promise of more progressive capitalism.

In contrast, contemporary globalization has been associated with the
displacement of Fordism by what neo-Gramscian theorists have called a
‘post-Fordist’ regime of accumulation. This new situation has been distin¬
guished by ‘flexibilization’ (Standing, 1999). The ‘flexible’ worker lacks a job
for life, but instead moves and retrains to meet altered market demands. To
facilitate such mobility most OECD governments have loosened laws on
hiring and firing. Post-Fordist workers are also expected to be ‘flexible’ in
respect of hours, wages, benefits, health and safety standards, etc. ‘Flexible’
jobs are often casual, part-time and temporary, with few if any benefits
beyond the (often low) wages offered. The workers involved frequently lack
collective bargaining arrangements and other union protections. Under these
conditions many households have needed more than one wage to make ends
meet.

On these various counts the move from Fordism to post-Fordism has
entailed significant deteriorations in working conditions, especially for less
skilled labour. Many workers who have lost jobs on Fordist terms have
returned to employment in ‘flexible’ positions. Most wage earners born after
1960 have never known Fordist securities during their working lives.
Flexibilization has gone further in the UK and USA than in continental
Europe and Japan, but the trend has not bypassed any OECD country. (For
more on Fordism and post-Fordism, see Cox, 1987: ch 9; Amin, 1994.)

Increased insecurity in the workplace has readily spilled over to affect
other aspects of life. The stresses induced by unceasing pressures for greater
productivity and worries about pensions, health insurances, etc., can
heighten tensions in the household and on the street. It would be difficult to
demonstrate precisely that labour flexibilization has fuelled domestic strife,
uncivil driving, hooliganism and other violence; and no doubt other factors



302 Nonnative and Policy Issues


have also played their part. However, it seems reasonable to posit that inse¬
curity at work has fed insecurity elsewhere in everyday life.

In addition, the demands of flexibility in waged labour have tended to
reduce the time and energy that people have available to execute unpaid
caring duties. The consequences for children and the infirm can be particu¬
larly unhappy, as well as for women, who tend to bear the bulk of domestic
caring tasks (a double burden of waged work plus housework). The reper¬
cussions of inadequate child rearing for the next generation may include
asocial behaviour and unstable intimate relationships.

Apart from the change in power relations between capital and labour
mentioned earlier, globalization has promoted the in many respects damag¬
ing shift to flexible labour in three other broad ways. First, some of the great¬
est flexibilization has occurred in the leading sectors of global capitalism.
Major demands for ‘flexibility’ have fallen on support staff in the retail,
financial, information and communications industries: that is, on shop assist¬
ants, bank clerks, data key punchers, telephone operators, and so on. Few of
these workers have gained substantial wages and benefits, good promotion
prospects, or long-term job security.

Second, flexibilization has generally accompanied the shift of jobs in the
globalizing economy from older industrial centres in the North to new sites in
the South and the East. As noted earlier, the scale of this transfer must not be
overestimated. However, on those occasions when it has occurred, positions
in the North with higher remuneration and greater worker protection have
tended to give way to lower-paid jobs in the South with longer hours, less
collective bargaining, and weaker health and safety standards. More gener¬
ally, too, global companies have not provided their employees in the South
and the East with the sorts of guarantees that workers in the North obtained
under Fordist arrangements. For example, already since the middle of the
twentieth century a number of shipping companies have used offshore ‘flag of
convenience’ arrangements to compromise the working conditions of seafar¬
ers (ITWF, 2004). Employees in the subcontracted firms that serve global
corporations have also often suffered poor work situations.

Third, much flexibilization has unfolded under the spectre of ‘global
competition’. Managers have pushed for ‘flexible’ labour in good part
because they have believed, rightly or wrongly, that higher guarantees to
employees would undermine a firm’s position in global markets. For their
part, workers have accepted ‘flexible’ contracts often because they have
believed, rightly or wrongly, that demanding higher conditions of service
would send jobs elsewhere in the world. Labour in the North has been
constantly reminded that alternative and allegedly more pliant workforces
are available in the East and the South.

The phrase ‘rightly or wrongly’ is added here since some would argue that
the economic logic of flexibilization is flawed. Critics of these practices



Globalization and (In)Security 303


suggest that lower labour guarantees could yield less rather than greater
competitiveness. Well-trained, well-remunerated, well-protected workers
could provide a more motivated, reliable and productive labour force. To this
extent reductions in wages and other working conditions could operate not
only against human security, but against efficiency as well.

This is not to say that no efforts have been made to achieve better labour
standards in a globalizing economy (Lee, 1997a; Standing, 1999; O’Brien,
2000; Rozendaal, 2002). The main site of global governance in respect of
worker protection has been the International Labour Organization. Among
other things the ILO created a Working Party on the Social Dimension of
Trade Liberalization in 1994, launched an agenda of ‘decent work’ in 1999,
and published a report on ‘fair globalization’ in 2004 (WCSDG, 2004). More
concretely, since the late 1940s the ILO has promoted formalized core labour
standards: for example, on freedom of association, the right of collective
bargaining, the abolition of forced labour, the prevention of discrimination in
employment, and a minimum wage. During the time of accelerated global¬
ization the agency has also greatly increased the number of its other conven¬
tions and recommendations and has attracted many more signatories to those
instruments. The ILO has in the past decade moreover broadened its concep¬
tion of work beyond formal labour to cover also informal employment,
household labour and the like. For example, the ILO Convention on Home
Work (1996) has sought to protect homeworkers (a largely female sector)
with minimum wages and conditions (HomeNet, 1999). An ILO Convention
on Migrant Workers is under preparation. However, far from all states have
ratified ILO measures, and relatively few states have endorsed recent conven¬
tions on subjects such as occupational safety, training, and health services.
Moreover, the ILO has lacked means to enforce its codes, in the way that
states can mobilize their courts or the WTO can invoke its Dispute Settlement
Mechanism.

For their part, transworld trade rules have as yet included little in the way
of labour standards. True, revisions to the Generalized System of Preferences
effective from 1995 have involved some elements of a social clause (Jordan,
1995: 28). However, attempts in 1996 to incorporate a Working Party on
Worker Rights into the WTO were rebuffed, with particularly strong resist¬
ance from governments of the NICs. Indeed, many in the South have worried
that appeals to ‘social protection’ are a ruse to sustain Northern advantages
in world trade (John and Chenoy, 1996). Much like the WTO, the proposed
(and for now abandoned) MAI protected capital mobility and property
rights, but neglected to safeguard labour rights. Nor have global financial
institutions incorporated guarantees regarding working conditions into
structural adjustment programmes.

On a macro-regional scale, the European Community adopted a Charter
of the Fundamental Social Rights (otherwise known as the Social Charter) in



304 Nonnative and Policy Issues


1989 and included a Social Chapter in the Maastricht Treaty two years later
(Purdy, 1997). The Social Charter has enshrined principles such as equal
treatment for women at work, works councils, and EU-wide collective
bargaining with global companies. Elsewhere the NAFTA agreement of
1994 included a side accord regarding labour rights and standards, although
these provisions have had even fewer teeth than the EU measures. In South
America MERCOSUR has had a social committee that includes trade union
representation, but this organ, too, has been quite marginal.

Elsewhere in suprastate governance the OECD in 2000 upgraded its
Guidelines on Multinational Enterprises inter alia to cover core labour
standards. In the same year the UN Global Compact for responsible business
addressed three of its nine main provisions to labour issues. Again, however,
the implementation mechanisms for such arrangements have remained
weak. In a word, fully fledged official global labour legislation does not
exist.

Private governance arrangements have taken some steps to fill the gaps,
inasmuch as labour standards are enshrined in a number of corporate social
responsibility schemes (previously discussed in Chapter 6). For example,
various firms engaged in global production (especially in clothing, footwear
and toy industries) have since the 1990s adopted voluntary codes of conduct
on labour practices in their factories. However, CSR-related labour measures
have often suffered from limited scope, unambitious targets, loose terms,
mixed record of (voluntary) application, lack of independent monitoring and
verification, and an absence of clear stakeholder participation and account¬
ability mechanisms. Many CSR exercises have mostly focused on improving
market image, particularly when the schemes have been introduced following
adverse publicity from consumer campaigns.

In sum, despite some mild countervailing measures from official and
private governance, on the whole flexibilization through globalization has
had adverse repercussions for security in work. Once again, though, the prob¬
lems have not lain with globalization as such, but with inclinations to take a
laissez-faire approach to working conditions in global capitalism. More
proactive policies towards labour standards could produce a more socially
sensitive and sustainable globalization.


Identity

Human security not only has the military, environmental and economic
aspects discussed so far, but psychological and cultural dimensions as well. A
major issue in this respect is identity, given the importance for security of an
assured sense of self. To be at ease in the world a person requires inter alia a
comfortable concept of who one is, where one belongs, and what one wants



Globalization and (In)Security 305


to become, together with a confidence that the surrounding society will
respect and preserve these ways of being, belonging and becoming.

What repercussions have the various developments regarding globaliza¬
tion and identity discussed in Chapter 7 had for human security? This ques¬
tion has attracted much less research and policy response than matters such
as ecology, poverty and labour. Nevertheless, several general implications of
globalization for the security of identity can be deduced.

On the positive side, contemporary globalization has in some ways
provided wider scope for the exploration and expression of individual and
collective identity. As noted in Chapter 7, territorialist geography tended to
entail a restrictive bias toward state-centred national identities. Indeed, the
world of nationalist identity coupled with statist governance often repressed
indigenous cultures, racial and religious minorities, and homosexuality. In
contrast, the growth of supraterritorial spaces has created more room for the
expression of elements of identity besides state-nationhood, such as class,
disability, gender, generation (especially youth), minority nationalities,
profession, race, religion and sexual preference. Globalization has thereby
encouraged a shift from the straitjacket of one-dimensional nationalism (as
tended to prevail in the mid-twentieth century) to greater pluralism. Many
people have gained the security of a more genuine sense of self as a result, for
example, of religious discovery, women’s activism, ‘coming out’ with minor¬
ity sexualities, and celebrations of indigenous culture.

On the other hand, the turn toward plural, multidimensional and hybrid
identities has removed the security of simplicity and predictability that
marked a territorialist world where one’s collective identity tended to be
neatly defined by a single nationality connected to a corresponding state. The
sense of self can become ambiguous and unsteady when a person holds
several national identities at once: for example, the nationality of their coun¬
try of residence; the nationality of their country of origin (in the case of
migrants); the nationality of a substate or transstate territory; and so on.
Further uncertainty can arise when the national self coexists in a person
uneasily (and perhaps in contradiction and competition) with class, religious
and other identities. In these ways a more global world can leave some indiv¬
iduals feeling torn and lost.

Contemporary globalization has also sometimes undermined the security
of identity through cultural destruction. Various life-worlds have succumbed
to an invasion of electronic mass media, transplanetary tourism, global
English, global consumerism, and other supraterritorial interventions that
have contradicted local traditions. For example, radio made little time for the
‘long songs’ of the Dayak people in Sarawak. As a result this age-old cultural
form was obliterated less than 20 years after the introduction of the wireless
(Rubenstein, 1991). The Internet, too, is not conducive to oral cultures. In
addition, dams, roads and other major infrastructure projects financed by



306 Nonnative and Policy Issues


global institutions and/or built by global contractors have severely disrupted
a number of indigenous ways of life. Indeed, to date the policies of transworld
economic agencies like the BIS, IMF, IOSCO, OECD, WTO and World Bank
have tended to be culturally blind, an approach that has arguably contributed
to some wanton destruction of life-worlds. The Convention for the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (1972), the World
Commission on Culture and Development (1995), and the Universal
Declaration on Cultural Diversity (2001) have offered rare and toothless
antidotes. Likewise, the World’s Bank Comprehensive Development
Framework (CDF) announced in 1998 has advanced only modestly towards
its objectives to integrate anthropological with economic concerns and to
draw policy inputs from the grassroots as well as development professionals.

In these circumstances some observers have worried that globalization can
crush cultural diversity along with biological diversity. For instance, up to
half of the languages currently spoken by humanity are already threatened
with extinction, and some linguists have forecast that over 90 per cent could
die out during the twenty-first century (Wurm, 1996). Global media have
encouraged this trend with their emphasis on a few major world languages.
For example, as of 2004 nearly 90 per cent of Internet use occurred in just
nine languages (Internet, 2004).

That said, cultural preservationists have discovered on various occasions that
the technologies of globalization can be used to reinvigorate otherwise declining
or dormant identities. For example, video productions have contributed to a
revitalization of Bedouin culture in Egypt (L. Abu-Lughod, 1989). Television
has fostered self-assertion among Aboriginals in Australia and among Catalans
in Spain. Satellite broadcasts have furthered the survival of the Inuktituk
language in the Canadian Arctic. Radio has fuelled Maori identity politics in
Aotearoa (the indigenous name for New Zealand) (Dowmunt, 1993).

Thus, as with other aspects of human security, globalization has had
mixed impacts on identity. Postterritorialist geography has carried construc¬
tive implications in some respects and destructive consequences in others. On
the one hand, transworld relations have shown possibilities of cultural revival
and innovation. On the other hand, contemporary globalization has shown
potentials of violent cultural homogenization, particularly through western¬
ization and Americanization. In respect of identity too, therefore, the prob¬
lems of globalization and human security lie not so much in enlarged
globality per se as in the way that this geographical trend is handled.


Knowledge

Next to identity, another cultural aspect of human security that needs to be
evaluated in regard to globalization concerns the confidence that people feel



Globalization and (In)Security 307


in the knowledge that they hold. As indicated in Chapter 8, the rapid contemp¬
orary expansion of transworld relations has contributed to several shifts in
prevailing structures of understanding. Have these developments promoted
or undermined security?

In terms of security enhancement, the growth of religious revivalism asso¬
ciated with contemporary globalization has provided adherents with, for
them, secure truths. Revivalists among Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews
and Muslims have all enjoyed the comfort of believing that they hold an indis¬
putable knowledge. Likewise, secular fundamentalists who endorse an
uncritical rationalism have felt sure in the gospel of science, the dogma of effi¬
ciency, and the cult of progress.

Yet each of these absolutisms has maintained its truth claims in part by
denying a hearing to alternative beliefs. Fundamentalism has thereby tended
to breed violence between contending dogmas. Thus, for example, many
revivalist Sikhs have clashed, sometimes with force of arms, against Hindus.
Many revivalist Hindus have sought to silence Muslims in India. Many
revivalist Muslims have aimed to eliminate the state of Israel, while many
revivalist Jews have tried to marginalize Christian and Muslim Arabs in
Palestine. Many revivalist Christians have run roughshod over other faiths in
their campaigns of proselytization. In these cases and more, the security of
absolutist knowledge for some has come at a cost of insecurity for others, to
the point of fatal consequences in some cases.

Like religious fundamentalists, devout rationalists have generally also had
little ear for alternative forms of knowledge. The ‘imperialism of science’ has
thereby constituted a threat to circles like indigenous peoples and religious
traditionalists who have found their security of knowledge in nonrationalist
thinking. True, globalization has, as seen in Chapter 8, created some addi¬
tional room for different epistemologies to develop. However, transplanetary
connectivity has at the same time given rationalists extra tools with which to
marginalize and silence rival modes of understanding. For example, cyber¬
space, transworld publications and global conferences have served rational¬
ist academics far more than holy persons and other nonrationalist teachers.
Secularism has dominated in global foundations and think tanks.
Technocracy has dominated in global governance. Instrumentalism has
dominated in global business. These circumstances of the globalizing world
have made it harder for nonrational knowledges to survive.

Meanwhile, insofar as it has encouraged the rise of reflexivity, globaliza¬
tion has also tended to undermine the security of knowledge among rational¬
ists. Part of the secular intelligentsia has thereby lost objectivist certainties
and Enlightenment confidence. Most rationalists are uncomfortable with the
indeterminacy of truth in postpositivist epistemology. Even self-proclaimed
relativists often carry too much residual rationalist baggage to feel genuinely
at ease with knowledge that is held to have no validity beyond its particular



308 Nonnative and Policy Issues


personal, social and historical context. Meanwhile most rationalists have
recoiled from what they regard as the ‘meaninglessness’ of postmodernist
epistemology. Indeed, in academic circles scientists have often mobilized to
suppress postmodernist challenges to rationalism with as much determina¬
tion as they have opposed traditionalist myths.

Hence several turns in knowledge structures encouraged by globalization
have tended to unsettle human security. Fundamentalism (both religious and
secular) has provided confidence to some, but at a cost of violence to many.
Meanwhile reflexive rationalism has tended to sow unsettling doubt, and
postmodernism has tended to remove any trace of certainty.


Social cohesion

Many aspects of human security discussed above - including peace, crime,
poverty, working conditions and identity - relate closely to a final issue, the
security derived from social cohesion. A keystone of human safety and confi¬
dence is a firm sense of being integrated into and being supported by a larger
collectivity. Recognizing the importance of this matter, the 1995 World
Summit for Social Development promoted social integration as a leading
theme next to poverty reduction and employment creation.

Certainly the logic of neoliberalist policies towards globalization has
posed problems for social cohesion. Neoliberalism has approached social
relations as a matter of competition in a global marketplace, a conception
that makes little or no room for cooperation and collective interests. One
arch-neoliberalist, Margaret Thatcher, has gone so far as to proclaim that
‘there is no such thing as society’.

Most commentators now recognize that such extreme atomization is
unsustainable in theory or practice. Social relations cannot be reduced to
isolated individuals engaged in work and consumption. There is need for a
social bond, but how is it to be forged in a globalizing world?

As intimated in Chapter 7, globalization has undermined the modern
premise that social cohesion can and should be wholly guaranteed through
the state-nation-country-society unit. On that principle previous generations
have assumed that people would mainly secure social integration through a
territorial homeland. True, already in earlier periods, lower levels of trans¬
planetary relations made it impossible fully to parcel the world into discrete
territorial blocs with neatly separated societies, each unified by a single
nationality and ruled by a sovereign authority. However, strong forces of
territorialist geography, statist governance and nationalist identity at this
previous time combined to give the formula considerable viability and
appeal. In contrast, contemporary large-scale growth of global spaces has
made even an approximation of this model of social cohesion infeasible.



Globalization and (In)Security 309


As noted in Chapter 1, some have looked to local communities to solve the
problem of social integration in a more global world. This approach has
much appeal at first blush, though it can easily romanticize the local.
Moreover, intensified global relations have often weakened intimacy and
mutual support within neighbourhoods as well as within countries. People
who are glued to television and computer screens may have virtual bonds
across the planet but little or no acquaintance with persons living next door.
Similarly, globally mobile companies tend (exceptions duly noted) to hold
limited long-term commitments to the localities where their facilities are situ¬
ated at any particular time. Flexible workers, too, often have restricted
opportunities to plant roots in a locality before the labour market calls them
elsewhere.

Contemporary globalization has also undermined social cohesion by
fuelling various divisive communitarian dynamics. Communitarianism is a
mode of identity politics where the ‘in-group’ is constructed through an
emphasis of difference from and polarized opposition to an ‘out-group’.
Communitarian ‘us-them’ logic is seen inter alia in binary divisions between
compatriots and foreigners, between the West and the Rest, between whites
and people of colour, between straights and gays, etc. In all of these cases,
integration of part of a population is achieved by disintegration of the larger
collectivity. Moreover, this negatively based cohesion - defining the
purported community more for what it is not than for what it is - tends to
yield only shallow solidarity.

Much communitarianism has been evident in the trends of identity politics
described in Chapter 7. For example, the proliferation of nationalist move¬
ments has usually involved substantial degrees of aggressive othering.
Nonterritorial solidarities, too, have often rested on the exclusion of a certain
‘other’: that is, a different class, a different race, and so on. Religious revival¬
ists, radical feminists and others have usually created cohesion of their in¬
group largely by stressing separation from and conflict with ‘outsiders’. In
other words, these transplanetary communities have needed to fragment the
world-societal whole in order to integrate their particular slice of humanity.
Overall social cohesion - both within countries and on a world scale - has
readily suffered as a result.

Given these limitations of nation-states, local communities, ethnic
revivals, and transworld networks, there is pressing need to develop alter¬
native models of social cohesion, together with associated new notions of
citizenship and democracy. Unfortunately, little progress with such inno¬
vations has been booked to date. A few academics have contemplated
reconstructions of citizenship for a more global world (Steenbergen, 1994;
Lacarrieu and Raggio, 1997; Castles and Davidson, 2000; Vandenberg,
2000). However, these intellectual musings have filtered little into everyday
practice.



310 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Some firms have espoused notions of corporate citizenship as a way to
contribute to a sustainable social fabric in a more global world. A number
of business executives have recognized the limitations of neoliberalism with
remarks like ‘tomorrow’s successful company cannot afford to be a faceless
institution that does nothing more than sell the right product at the right
price’ (Thomas, 1999). The corporate social responsibility movement has
stressed a ‘triple bottom line’ of social and environmental as well as finan¬
cial balances. According to this vision, business should link ‘three P’s’ of
people, planet and profit. However, most companies have avoided CSR
issues, and many CEOs have apparently signed up to the slogans mainly as
a marketing ploy and/or to parry calls for greater official regulation of
global capital. Yet even though fully developed and enthusiastically
pursued CSR could promote greater social cohesion, it would not be suffi¬
cient. Society cannot be reduced to a market, however friendly that market
might be.

To address this point, a number of reformists have advocated that the
global public sector should join the global private sector to forge greater
social cohesion amidst increased transworld relations. In this vision, global
governance should do more than facilitate the growth of global markets, and
also advance general social integration. Previously cited arguments for the
development of global public goods have followed this reasoning that the
provision of collective transplanetary benefits through global governance
mechanisms can generate social bonds beyond the nation-state-country.
However, global public goods initiatives have made little concrete progress to
date.

Next to CSR and global public goods, a third possible source for greater
social cohesion in a globalizing world is global civil society. Indeed, trans¬
planetary associations have already built some significant transworld bonds
between women, indigenous peoples and so on. The contemporary expan¬
sion of transworld humanitarian relief efforts has also promoted social cohe¬
sion beyond the nation-state-country. Global NGOs have also filled many
gaps in social services in countries with weak states and markets, although the
question remains whether NGOs have been providing foundations for
socially sustainable globalization or only applying plaster to the crumbling
walls of neoliberalist policies (Fowler, 1994; Devine, 1996). Moreover,
global civil society has often operated with exclusions that undermine rather
than forward social integration (Scholte, 2004b: ch 5).

In sum, globalization has made territorialist-statist-nationalist approaches
to the construction of society non-viable, and no adequate alternative has yet
been devised. This void has arguably encouraged a general decline in social
responsibility, with particularly unhappy consequences for vulnerable
circles. But all including the most privileged of elites suffer when a secure
social bond is not in place.



Globalization and (In)Security 311


Conclusion

The preceding discussion of globalization and human security has taken
stock across a wide spectrum of issues. This review has indicated that contemp¬
orary social life is steeped in insecurities and that many of the problems have
had significant connections with globalization. To be sure, people in different
contexts across the globalizing world have faced different combinations of
challenges to security, and some have confronted more imminent threats to
survival than others. However, no one has been entirely safe - objectively and
subjectively - and globalization has often received much blame for height¬
ened insecurities.

As this chapter has shown, the relationship between increased globality
and trends in human security is actually quite complex. For one thing, the
implications of globalization have been positive as well as negative. As the
boxed summary indicates, none of the eleven issue areas investigated in this
chapter has had a completely one-sided balance sheet, where all is detriment¬
al and nothing beneficial.

From this overview it is readily apparent that globalization has been asso¬
ciated with many harms to human security; however, this process of
geographical transformation has never been the sole source of damage, and
care should be taken not to overplay its significance. Each of the problems of
human security discussed in this chapter has resulted from a confluence of
multiple circumstances in which growing global connections is only part of
the equation. Anti-globalization protesters are mistaken if they assume that
the dissolution of transworld relations would by itself solve the problems of
human security.

Moreover, some of the negative impacts of globalization on security have
been overblown. For example, the Y2K millennium bug that was widely
expected to paralyse global computer networks on 01/01/2000 did nothing of
the sort. SARS was touted as the global plague of the twenty-first century, but
in fact caused only 800 deaths. Likewise, aeroplane crashes and terrorist
attacks have killed far fewer people than the barrage of often lurid media
coverage would suggest. Some NGOs have played up global humanitarian
emergencies and global ecological threats to attract publicity and raise
revenue. ‘Risk entrepreneurs’ have induced people to buy more insurance
than probabilities warrant. In these cases and more, people have experienced
exaggerated degrees of distress in respect of globalization.

A number of other detrimental effects of globalization on human security
have been largely unnecessary and avoidable. As indicated above, it has in
no way been inevitable that increased transplanetary connectivity should
perpetuate or worsen armed conflicts, crime, environmental degradation,
financial instability, poverty, working conditions or cultural destruction.
Where contemporary globalization has had negative implications in these



312 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Globalization and (in)security in summary

Peace

• intense global connectivity has created significant disincentives to war
among the OECD states

• the growth of global governance has brought increased possibilities of
arms control and conflict management

but

• global reach has facilitated military interventions from the North into
the South

• globalization has fuelled violence in the context of micro-nationalism
and religious revivalism

• technologies of globalization have substantially raised the destructive
capacities of war

• global arms markets have spread many destructive means of contempor¬
ary warfare

• globalization has greatly raised the profile of terrorist politics

Crime

• expanded global spaces have broadened opportunities to combat crime

but

• globality has provided criminals with important tools for their illicit
activities

• transworld networks have given criminals a powerful form of organi¬
zation

Ecological integrity

• global consciousness has promoted greater ecological awareness

• technologies of globalization have improved means to monitor envi¬
ronmental change

• a number of suprastate governance mechanisms have enhanced envi¬
ronmental care

but

• many global activities are heavily polluting

• global restructuring has often put downward pressures on environment¬
al standards

• global ecological changes have generated much uncertainty and fear

Health

• global organizations have pursued multiple campaigns for health
improvement

• global markets have made many more health treatments available to
many more people

but

• global markets have also spread many goods that carry health risks




Globalization and (In)Security 313


• global debts have undermined health expenditures in many poor coun¬
tries

• global migration has encouraged many health professionals to leave
countries with the greatest need of their services

• intense global movement of people and produce has accelerated the
transmission of many diseases

Poverty

• global trade and investment have contributed to rapid welfare rises in
the NICs

but

• comparatively few countries have achieved NIC status

• existing global trade rules have had some detrimental effects on poor
countries

• global debt burdens in the South have severely compromised poverty
reduction efforts

• several global financial crises have impacted negatively on poor people

• economic restructuring in the face of globalization has often increased
poverty

Financial stability

• global finance has mobilized large sums of capital for investment

• moderate levels of financial market instability can enhance efficiency

but

• the high volatility of liberalized global financial markets has added
considerably to feelings of economic insecurity

• crises in global finance have often harmed vulnerable circles as well as
investors

• governance bodies have taken inadequate measures to curb wild fluctu¬
ations in global financial markets

Employment

• global companies and industries have generated millions of new jobs

but

• the supply of waged employment from global capitalism has lagged far
behind the need

• global capitalism is generally less labour intensive than older sectors of
production

• global finance capitalism has diverted substantial investment from the
‘real’ economy

• global corporate relocation has brought some job losses and many fears
for job security

• economic restructuring in the face of globalization has brought job
losses




314 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Working conditions

• some global companies have improved terms of service for workers in
the South

but

• globalization has undermined the Fordist social contract with flexibi-
lization

• adequate guarantees of workers’ rights have not developed under
global capitalism

• poor labour conditions have often exacerbated insecurities of life
outside the workplace

Identity

• global links have increased possibilities to develop multiple aspects of
the self

• technologies of globalization have reinvigorated some declining
cultures

but

• global relations have sometimes also contributed to cultural destruction

• the ambiguities and contradictions of a multidimensional self can be
unsettling

Knowledge

• contemporary globalization has sometimes encouraged fundament¬
alisms that offer apparently secure truths

but

• fundamentalism has generally involved violence toward alternative
beliefs

• global channels have often facilitated the imposition of rationalist
dogmas

• reflexive rationalists have lost Enlightenment confidence

• few people feel secure with the postmodernist alternative of indetermi¬
nate knowledge

Social cohesion

• globalization has facilitated the growth of various transworld social
bonds

• global NGOs have often supplied social services in countries where
states and markets are deficient

but

• neoliberalist globalization has tended to neglect needs for social inte¬
gration

• globalization has undermined possibilities of achieving adequate social
cohesion through the nation-state-country alone

• alternative ways to achieve social cohesion have thus far remained
underdeveloped




Globalization and (In)Security 315


areas, the fault has lain with policy choices (often on neoliberalist lines) rather
than with transworld relations as such. Alternative approaches towards glob¬
alization could alleviate or eliminate these harms - or indeed even generate
positive outcomes.

However, after discounting for hyperbole and misguided policies, certain
other contemporary troubles of human security have been to a significant
degree intrinsic to the shift towards a more global social relations. For exam¬
ple, larger and faster transplanetary movements of people and produce have
created greater problems of disease control; this problem is inherent to glob¬
alization, regardless of the policy framework adopted towards it. Likewise,
labour-saving technologies in much of global capitalism have generated extra
difficulties for provision of waged employment. Contemporary large-scale
globalization has also imposed unavoidable challenges of building new
strategies of cultural and psychological security that address a context of
more plural and hybrid identities. Also, as a shift away from territorialist
geography, globalization has brought inescapable problems of developing
different bases of social cohesion to replace the nationalist-statist formula of
old. More generally, globalization has invariably contributed to a backdrop
of uncertainty that tends to accompany any significant social change.

Dealing with human insecurity is therefore a major political challenge in
contemporary globalization. No social order can provide absolute security,
of course, but the evidence assembled in this chapter gives good cause to ask
whether globalization needs to produce as much insecurity as it has tended to
do so far.



Chapter 10

Globalization and (In)Equality

Main points of this chapter
Class inequalities
Country inequalities
Gender inequalities
Other inequalities
Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• globalization has had impacts on various types of social stratification,
including with respect to class, country, gender, race, urban/rural
divides, age and (dis)ability

• although contemporary globalization has helped to narrow social hierar¬
chies in certain respects, in other ways the process has tended to widen
structural gaps in life chances

• these inequalities are not inherent to globalization, but have mainly
flowed from prevailing policy approaches to transplanetary connections


Social justice involves more than guarantees of certain minimum standards of
human security for all. In addition, equity involves the promotion of equal life
chances, so that people face a level playing field in society, free of arbitrary
privileges and imposed exclusions. Equality in this sense means that social
relations are not marked by structural stratifications of opportunity that
accord some persons an inbuilt a priori advantage over others (for example,
by accident of birth). From this perspective justice would entail moving soci¬
ety from a situation of hierarchical poles to one of inclusive circles.

Historically, various kinds of arbitrary privilege have arisen in social rela¬
tions. Examples include dominance and subordination on the basis of class,
caste, country, gender, race, urban/rural divides, sexual orientation, (disabil¬
ity and age group. In relation to class, for instance, persons born into some
socioeconomic circles have generally had fewer life chances than those born
into others. Likewise, in terms of countries, individuals in the South or the
East who have equivalent personal capacities and make similar efforts as
individuals in the North have tended to harvest fewer fruits, simply by virtue of


316




Globalization and (In)Equality 317


living in one geopolitical zone of the planet rather than another. In addition,
hierarchical gender relations have generally given men built-in privileges in
social life relative to women. Socially constructed racial inequalities have
usually advantaged white people over people of colour. Meanwhile across the
world urban-centred development strategies have tended to marginalize rural
sectors. Lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transsexuals have often encountered
discrimination on account of their sexual inclination. Similarly, mentally and
physically handicapped people have frequently faced inordinate socially
imposed obstacles to the realization of their potentials. In terms of age, more
vulnerable groups such as children and the elderly have readily seen their
interests systematically subordinated to those of people in mid-life who
occupy most decision-taking positions.

The different lines of inequality intersect, of course. A person may be struc¬
turally subordinated in one sense (e.g., as a woman) but arbitrarily privileged
in another (e.g., as an upper caste). Thus in assessing an individual’s position
in respect of social inequality the various hierarchies need to be considered in
combination. A professional white urban middle-aged able-bodied hetero¬
sexual man in the North attracts the most structural advantages, whereas a
low-trained rural elderly disabled homosexual woman of colour in the South
has no social category in her favour. Not surprisingly, then, an Islamic black
female mental health advocate in rural eastern Uganda has declared regard¬
ing globalization that (Wambedde, 2003): ‘We are the grass that suffers when
the elephants fight. No one comes to ask what our problems are and what
alternatives we have. Things are imposed.’

This is not the place for an extended exploration of the intricate political-
philosophical issues surrounding the principle of equality. These arguments
are well summarized elsewhere (Clayton and Williams, 2000; Kymlicka,
2001). Suffice to say that, in the approach adopted here, equality does not
require that social categories be eliminated and that all people become the
same. Such uniformity is neither attainable nor desirable. However, it is
manifestly inequitable when an embedded stratification of social positions
largely determines whether or not people gain access to the resources they
need to develop their capacities. Thus there is no justifiable reason why child¬
ren from wealthier circles should have more life chances than children born
into poorer circles, or why men should have greater opportunities than
women on grounds of gender, or why rural inhabitants should be structurally
disadvantaged relative to town dwellers. Greater rewards for greater accom¬
plishments can be defended, but justice demands that all parties have equiva¬
lent possibilities to produce those greater accomplishments.

Social equality is not only right in principle, but it can also have positive
repercussions for the issues of human security discussed in Chapter 9. To the
extent that arbitrary social hierarchies prevail, there is less likely to be peace,
sufficient care for the environment, good public health, poverty eradication,



318 Nonnative and Policy Issues


adequate labour protection, enhanced identity and knowledge, and social
cohesion. Conversely, to the extent that people feel insecure, they are less
likely to relinquish any unfair social advantages that they might have. In addi¬
tion, as is elaborated in Chapter 11, greater social equality is deeply intercon¬
nected with greater democracy.

Needless to say, contemporary globalization does not constitute the
original source of structural inequalities. Stratification by class, country,
gender, race and other social categories long predates the current growth of
transplanetary connections. Hence the question is how globalization has
affected the forms and the intensity of social hierarchies in contemporary
history. In what ways and to what extent has the accelerated spread of
transworld relations since the mid-twentieth century either loosened or main¬
tained - or perhaps even exacerbated - arbitrary subordinations in social life ?

As noted in Chapter 1, claims and counterclaims about the effects of glob¬
alization on social inequality have filled academic journals and political
speeches alike since the early 1990s. Even the World Bank has acknowledged
the centrality of the issue by devoting its 2005 World Development Report to
the theme of equity (World Bank, 2005). Proponents of globalization have
promised enhanced opportunities for all, while critics have decried intensified
subordinations. These arguments have key political importance. The expan¬
sion of global relations would be more sustainable to the extent that people
perceive a fair distribution of chances to benefit from the process. In contrast,
prevailing policies towards globalization - and maybe even transplanetary
connectivity as such - would tend to fail to the extent that they are viewed as
unjust.

No consensus is in prospect on the relationship between globalization and
equality. The issues involved are enormously complex to analyse, both
conceptually and empirically. Much research by economists in recent years
has assessed the question in terms of trends in income distributions between
and within countries (e.g., Aghion and Williamson, 1998; Stewart and Berry,
2000; Lindert and Williamson, 2001; O’Rourke, 2002; Sutcliffe, 2002;
Wade, 2004). Unfortunately for the purposes of the present book, these
economic investigations have generally defined globalization as marketiza-
tion. That is, the studies have looked for correlations between the adoption of
neoliberalist policies (especially trade liberalization) and trends in income
disparities. However, as argued earlier, liberalization is only one aspect of
contemporary globalization and is not intrinsic to the geographical change.
In addition, social inequality involves much more than income differentials
(e.g., other resource distributions, political hierarchies, cultural dominations
and psychological oppressions). Besides, these studies employ such varying
methodologies (in terms of different units of analysis, different indicators,
different data sources, and different modes of calculation) that it is very hard
to draw any firm conclusions even about income inequality. Moreover, on



Globalization and (In)Equality 319


those occasions where statistical links can be drawn between globalization
and trends in inequality (up or down), the correlations do not necessarily
indicate causal significance. Indeed, by adopting different foci and formulas,
different researches have yielded sometimes substantially contrasting results.
The present chapter therefore does not aim to find precise and definitive
quantitative evidence for causal links between globalization and inequality.
The emphasis is put instead on identifying general connections that are
described with illustrative examples.

Taking this approach, the record on globalization and inequality looks
mixed. On the positive side, some developments in contemporary globaliza¬
tion have worked against structurally imposed hindrances on people. For
example, as elaborated below, contemporary global capitalism has in some
ways increased opportunities for women to engage in waged employment.
However, the recent growth of global spaces has - under prevailing neoliber-
alist policies - often distributed costs and benefits in ways that further favour
the already privileged and further marginalize the already disadvantaged.

As a result, global relations have, to date, in many instances widened
resource gaps and reinforced social hierarchies, especially those related to
class, country and urban/rural divides. Class stratification has meant that
investors, managers, professionals and certain skilled workers have profited
far more from globalization than less trained workers. In respect of countries,
embedded hierarchies have thus far channelled the benefits of globalization
disproportionately to lands of the North relative to those of the South and the
East. With its generally urban-centric character, contemporary globalization
has also tended to accentuate the marginalization of rural areas. Trends with
regard to gender, race, (dis)ability and age stratifications have been more
ambiguous or mixed, but neoliberalist policies towards globalization have in
certain respects clearly operated against women, people of colour, the
disabled and the elderly.

Given this record, the growth of global relations has not surprisingly
unsettled many consciences and sparked resistance from a number of subord¬
inated circles. As one trade union leader in France has noted, ‘Globalization
puts everyone on earth in the same boat, but some are in the hold while others
travel first class’ (Trogrlic, 2001). Whatever the precise impact, it is undeni¬
able that several decades of accelerated globalization have not removed
morally unacceptable gross inequalities from the world. Nor have prevailing
policies towards globalization given priority to rectifying these problems.
Authorities have not propounded targets for inequality reduction in the way
that other targets have proliferated to raise efficiency, alleviate poverty, and
enhance environmental protection.

To be sure, (neoliberalist) globalization has not been the sole cause of
persistent and in some cases growing violences of inequality in today’s world.
However, the rise of transplanetary connectivity has contributed to these



320 Nonnative and Policy Issues


unhappy trends in at least four important general ways. First, people in differ¬
ent social categories have often had arbitrarily unequal opportunities to
access purportedly ‘free’ and ‘open’ global spaces. Second, on its mainly
neoliberalist course, contemporary global capitalism has often undermined
the redistributive mechanisms that were built up through many states during
the first three-quarters of the twentieth century. Third, global regimes (that is,
the rules and institutions that govern transworld flows) have thus far tended
to underwrite allocations of benefits and harms that favour the already
advantaged. Fourth, contemporary globalization has substantially under¬
mined the capacity of traditional, territorially based social movements like
trade unionism and anti-colonialism to campaign for a fair distribution of life
chances. More positively, though, globalization has often facilitated a growth
of new, substantially supraterritorial social movements that have highlighted
questions of gender justice, racial equity, children’s rights, opportunities for
disabled persons, and a so-called ‘right to development’ for all countries.

The rest of this chapter examines the dynamics of (mal)distribution under
contemporary globalization in more detail. Most research on globality and
social equality has addressed stratifications associated with class,
North-South divisions, and gender; thus these three types of hierarchies are
discussed at greater length below. Less evidence is currently available regard¬
ing the implications of globalization for racial stratifications, urban/rural
divides, sexual minorities, (dis)abilities, and generational inequalities; hence
remarks on these matters are more brief.

Throughout the discussion below it becomes apparent that social inequal¬
ity is no more intrinsic to globality than to territorial geography. Yes, struc¬
tural hierarchies between social groups have often persisted and grown in the
context of contemporary globalization. However, these trends have mainly
resulted from laissez-faire policies toward globalization and are not inherent
in globalization itself. The adoption of different approaches to globalization
could yield more just outcomes.


Class inequalities

As noted in Chapter 1, many critics have alleged that contemporary global¬
ization has intensified class inequalities. ‘Class’ refers here to the division of a
population in respect of different roles in the production process. In contemp¬
orary capitalism, for example, people generally contribute to production as
investors, managers, professionals, skilled manual workers, or workers with¬
out formal qualifications (including homemakers). This division of labour is
often further reflected in associated differences related to customs, dress,
language, art forms, residential areas, etc.

Class diversity is to be accepted and in many cases welcomed; however, it



Globalization and (In)Equality 321


is unjust when class categories generate unequal life chances. Certain forms
of work may warrant higher rewards owing to the specialist competence
and/or greater exertion demanded. However, the premiums can become
excessive, and class distinctions have often restricted social mobility, educa¬
tional opportunities, access to health care, and so on. In such situations class
difference becomes class hierarchy.

Class inequalities existed long before the current period of accelerated
globalization, of course; yet how has the growth of transplanetary and
supraterritorial capitalism affected class gaps in more recent times? As noted
above, statistical data on this question have focused on income differentials,
with particular reference to a standard if somewhat crude measure known as
the Gini coefficient. Historically this indicator has normally related to income
inequality within a country’s population; however, recently several
researchers have calculated a Gini coefficient in respect of global humanity.
These studies have suggested that world income inequality between house¬
holds has seen little change during the period of accelerated globalization in
the second half of the twentieth century (Berry, 2002). For example, a lead
economist at the World Bank has calculated that the planetary Gini coeffi¬
cient rose from 0.63 in 1988 to 0.67 in 1993 before dropping again to 0.63 in
1998 (Milanovic, 1999, 2005). Another thorough investigation by a
respected economist has suggested a fall in the global Gini coefficient from
0.67 in 1980 to 0.63 in 2000 (Sutcliffe, 2002). Whatever the precise trend, it
is noteworthy that all studies agree that the global Gini coefficient has
remained greater than all but the very highest country Gini coefficients. In
other words, income inequality between persons on a planetary scale has
almost always been larger than such inequality within countries.

In national spheres, income inequality has over recent decades moved in
different directions depending on the country in question and the statistical
method used. However, one wide-ranging study has concluded that 48 out of
73 countries for which data of a sufficient standard are available experienced
growth of income inequality during the 1980s and 1990s (Cornia, 2004).
Thus, on this measure, two-thirds of countries would have seen widening
class gaps during the heyday of neoliberalist globalization.

In the USA, for example, differences in household income between the top
fifth and the bottom fifth of the populace narrowed between 1947 and 1973,
but then increased by more than 50 per cent between 1973 and 1996 (Burtless
et al., 1998: 3). Wealth gaps of this kind have also grown in recent decades
across almost all other OECD countries, albeit usually not as much as in the
USA (Ghai, 1994: 30-2; HDR, 1999: 37). Wage differentials have tended to
widen in the North between more trained labour (professionals, managers,
technicians) and less trained labour (people with no more than general
secondary education), after these gaps had decreased during the third quarter
of the twentieth century (Wood, 1994).



322 Nonnative and Policy Issues


In the East, meanwhile, most countries in the early transition from state
socialism to market capitalism experienced a steep ascent to wealth for a few
and a rapid descent to poverty for many. In Russia, for instance, the richest
fifth of the population saw its proportion of national income rise from 32.7
per cent in 1990 to 46.7 per cent in 1997, while the poorest fifth had its share
decline over the same period from 9.8 to 6.2 per cent (UNDP, 1998: 8).
Across most of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union in
the 1990s, a limited circle reaped major material gains from the new connec¬
tions to global capitalism, while the majority of people saw their standard of
life worsen.

Huge class inequalities have marked much of the South in the contempo¬
rary globalizing world as well. To take the most extreme example, in the early
1990s the wealthiest fifth of the population in Brazil earned 26 times as much
as the poorest fifth (HDR, 1991: 34). Major cities in Africa, Asia and Latin
America today often house the ugliest shantytowns in the shadows of the
shiniest skyscrapers. On the other hand, the Gini coefficient in Malaysia
declined from 0.49 in 1980 to 0.45 in 1993 (HDR, 1999: 88). Given this vari¬
ability it would seem important to look in greater detail at specific cases in
order to determine how and why class gaps have enlarged or shrunk in one or
the other country.

That said, a consistent trend has unfolded since the 1980s across countries
of the North, the East and the South to concentrate greater wealth in the very
rich. The most prosperous 5-10 per cent of country populations have
increasingly separated themselves off from the rest. As of the mid-1990s, the
value of the assets of 358 billionaires exceeded the combined annual incomes
of countries with 2.3 billion inhabitants, or the poorest 45 per cent of the
world’s population (HDR, 1996: 2; Speth, 1996: 33). Hence, at the start of
the twenty-first century some 7.7 million superrich each held more than $1
million in financial assets, while 2.8 billion others lived on less than $2 a day
(World Bank, 2001: 3; CapGemini, 2004:4). Even allowing for the objection
that assets are not directly comparable to income, these numbers point to a
deplorably uneven distribution of world resources that goes well beyond
anything that can be justified on grounds of special skill and effort. Perhaps
popular perceptions of growing general class inequality have tended to be
greater than overall data indicate owing to this superaccumulation by the
superrich. This explosion of wealth at the top end - and the general disincli¬
nation of governments to counteract it - has generated widespread unhappi¬
ness and cynicism.

Moreover, inequity on class lines has extended beyond matters of income
and assets. For example, many countries across the world have in recent
history witnessed a deterioration in publicly provided education. The alter¬
native of private instruction or other supplements has generally only been
available to wealthier households. As a result, class-based inequalities in



Globalization and (In)Equality 323


educational opportunities have tended to increase. Widespread deterioration
across the planet in public health, public housing and public transport has
likewise tended to impact more heavily on disadvantaged classes, thereby
deepening their subordination.

Yet how far, if at all, can greater class inequalities in contemporary history
be attributed to globalization? The two developments have unfolded concur¬
rently, but has the rise of transplanetary links caused the increases in class
gaps? Some authors of a neoliberalist persuasion have explicitly rejected the
proposition that globalization (understood as liberalization) could widen
class stratification (cf. Burtless et al., 1998: ch 4). At another extreme, many
critics have regarded deepened class hierarchies as an inherent and incorrigi¬
ble evil of global capitalism. Other studies have found no significant relation¬
ship between globalization (measured as increased cross-border trade and
investment) and within-country income inequality (Vivarelli, 2004).

What conclusion can be drawn? In some ways globalization has indeed
figured in the contemporary growth of class inequalities; however, this
outcome is not inherent in transworld social relations. The problem has lain
not in globality as such, but in the prevailing neoliberalist approach to
managing transplanetary relations. Policymakers have generally pursued
stabilization, liberalization, deregulation, privatization and fiscal constraint
without specific attention to issues of class justice.

One major way that globalization has widened class gaps in contemporary
history relates to access. ‘Free’ global markets have by no means been ‘open’
to all. As indicated in Chapter 5, expanded transworld spaces have generated
considerable additional surpluses; however, different classes have had
substantially different opportunities to tap that accumulation. Propertied
circles, professionals and certain skilled workers have had far better chances
to acquire the means (such as fax, air travel and financial advisers) to partici¬
pate actively in global capitalism. Class divides have substantially skewed
access to the Internet as well (Loader, 1998). Offshore banking and securities
have mainly been reserved to the superrich, such as 78,000 citizens of Saudi
Arabia who as of the mid-1990s had an average of $5.4 million each invested
in global finance (FT500, 1997: 46). In contrast, salaried workers have
tended to stay onshore, while most residents of today’s world have lacked any
bank account whatsoever. Several billion people have consumed global pro¬
ducts, but only a small minority has owned the resultant profits.

A second way that globalization has generated greater class divisions
follows from challenges to the redistributive state. Earlier in the twentieth
century, many national governments developed a number of mechanisms to
lessen class stratifications. Keynesianism in the North and various forms of
socialism elsewhere in the world went some way to extract from richer circles
that part of wealth accumulation which derived from class privilege.
Governments used instruments such as progressive taxation, wage controls,



324 Nonnative and Policy Issues


price manipulations and improved public services to redirect much of that
surplus to less advantaged socioeconomic circles. As a result, people from
subordinated classes often gained increased opportunities to realize their
potentials. To be sure, Keynesianism and socialism in practice frequently fell
short of their promise to remove injustice based on class. At a minimum,
however, the redistributive state that peaked in the third quarter of the twen¬
tieth century prevented class gaps from growing.

As indicated in Chapter 6, the expansion of globally mobile capital in
contemporary history has constrained states to abandon a number of redis¬
tributive policies. Across the world, governments have retreated from
progressive taxation (Tanzi, 1996). Top tax brackets fell in the OECD coun¬
tries from an average of 52 per cent in 1985 to 42 per cent in 1990 (HDR,
1999: 93). In addition, widespread introductions and increases of value-
added tax (VAT) have had a particularly regressive effect, especially when
applied to essential goods like basic clothing and staple foods. Liberalization
and deregulation have attenuated or terminated many redistributive wage
and price policies. Fiscal austerity to improve ‘global competitiveness’ has
often meant reductions in the amount and quality of state-provided educa¬
tion, housing, nutrition, health care, pensions and unemployment insurance.
In sum, neoliberalist globalization has tended to erode the protective shield of
the redistributive state. One aforementioned study has ascribed widespread
growing income inequality largely to what they regard as excessively liberal
economic policies and their rushed implementation (Cornia, 2004).

Emergent suprastate frameworks have not filled the regulatory gaps left by
states in respect of countering arbitrary class hierarchies. On the contrary,
global economic institutions such as the IMF, the OECD, the WTO and the
multilateral development banks have figured as major promoters of neoliber¬
alist policies since the 1980s. Indeed, many states have embarked on deregu¬
lation, liberalization, regressive tax reform and fiscal austerity in the context
of structural adjustment programmes sponsored by suprastate agencies.
Meanwhile these institutions have generally given short shrift to proposals
for redistributive global taxes or to calls for a comprehensive clampdown on
what in effect amounts to tax evasion by the wealthy through offshore
finance facilities. Regional bodies, too, have mainly concentrated on market
liberalization, with at best secondary attention to questions of class justice.
Regional trade agreements like NAFTA and several thousand bilateral invest¬
ment treaties have substantially strengthened the position of global capital
relative to labour. For its part the ILO has focused on securing minimum
workers’ rights rather than pursuing a more ambitious agenda of class equity.

Nor have social movements succeeded in mounting effective opposition to
growing class gaps in the context of neoliberalist globalization. The main
traditional force for class equity, the trade union movement, has experienced
substantial drops in membership across most of the world, particularly as old



Globalization and (In)Equality 325


industries have declined and new ‘flexible’ labour practices have often
excluded collective bargaining. Important trade union revivals such as the
Central Workers’ Union (CUT) in Brazil and the Confederation of South
African Trade Unions (COSATU) have been rare. Moreover, contemporary
trade unions have - notwithstanding some notable exceptions - tended to
persist with nationally and territorially based campaigns (Munck and
Waterman, 1999; Harrod and O’Brien, 2002; Munck, 2002). Such a strategy
is decidedly inadequate when a large proportion of capital is globally mobile.
In some countries where organized labour has retained significant strength,
trade union credibility has suffered owing to bureaucratization, close ties
with ruling circles, and self-aggrandizement of leaders. Meanwhile new
global social movements (for example, of consumer advocates, environmen¬
talists, human rights activists, and women) have tended to give only
secondary if any attention to issues of class equity.

In sum, contemporary globalization has in various ways encouraged a
greater entrenchment of class inequality. The Human Development Report
has in this vein spoken of ‘a breathtaking globalization of prosperity side by
side with a depressing globalization of poverty’ (HDR, 1994: 1). Even a
bastion of neoliberalism such as the WEF has acknowledged a challenge of
‘demonstrating how the new global capitalism can function to the benefit of
the majority and not only for corporate managers and investors’ (Schwab and
Smadja, 1996). Access to global spaces has been highly uneven on class lines.
Global capital has prompted states to undo many policies that previously
reduced arbitrary class inequalities. Global regimes have not installed redis¬
tributive mechanisms to replace those lost in states. Global social movements
have often underplayed questions of class stratification. None of these
dynamics of social injustice is inherent in globalization. The problem of rein¬
forced and enlarged class gaps, particularly in relation to the very wealthy,
has mainly lain in prevailing neoliberalist policies toward expanding
transworld relations.


Country inequalities

Arbitrary class hierarchies are of course not the only form of social inequality
in the contemporary globalizing world. In addition, for example, theses
concerning imperialism have since the nineteenth century highlighted a
purported inequitable stratification of countries alongside that of classes. The
modern world order, these accounts affirm, has unfairly discriminated
against the ‘South’ (also termed the ‘periphery’, ‘Third World’, ‘underdeve¬
loped countries’, etc.) and the ‘East’ (also called the ‘semi-periphery’, ‘Second
World’, ‘countries in transition’, etc.) in favour of the ‘North’ (alternatively
named the ‘core’, ‘centre’, ‘First World’ or ‘developed countries’).



326 Nonnative and Policy Issues


To be sure, like any analytical categorization, the distinction of a North, a
South and an East in world affairs involves substantial simplification. In prac¬
tice the North, the South and the East have each contained considerable
diversity. For example, the ‘poor’ South is normally taken to include the oil
sheikhs of Kuwait and the financial traders of Singapore. Meanwhile the
‘rich’ North is normally taken to include the slums of Washington, DC and
the marginalized farmers of Sicily. Indeed, poor people arguably form some¬
thing of a ‘South’ within the North, and elites could be said to constitute a
‘North’ within the South and the East. It would clearly be perverse if global
redistribution meant further enriching the wealthy of the South by further
impoverishing the needy of the North.

Similarly, a country can contain large internal geographical welfare
disparities. In Argentina, for instance, Chubut Province is much poorer than
Buenos Aires Province. In India the state of Bihar has far greater poverty than
Kerala. In England widespread wealth in the South East contrasts with pock¬
ets of need in the North East. China’s economic boom of recent decades has
concentrated on the coastal provinces, while many interior regions have
remained stagnant. Owing to such differentials, too, analysis in terms of
country units involves considerable simplification.

Yet social hierarchy within countries does not negate the fact of a concur¬
rent hierarchy between countries. Although the notion of a North-South
divide may be crude, it does capture an important configuration of world
social relations. People living in lands whose governments are members of the
G7, the OECD and NATO have generally held structural advantages over
inhabitants of countries that have lain outside such clubs. Resource distribu¬
tion, laws, institutions and inherited prejudices are such that the ‘average’
person born into a country of the South (where the ‘South’ has since 1989
arguably included much of the post-communist East) has had fewer life
chances than the ‘average’ person born into a country of the North. Even
when an individual from the South and an individual from the North have
had equivalent personal means, the resident of the North has generally been
able to obtain greater gains from the similar resource base. In these important
senses a North-South divide has imposed a significant arbitrary hierarchy of
opportunity in modern history.

A trend of increasing disparity between the world’s richest and poorest
countries can be tracked back to 1870, if not earlier (Pritchett, 1997); yet
how has contemporary large-scale globalization affected inequality on
North-South lines? Elas the end of territorialism meant a reduction of strat¬
ification based on territorial units? Or have critics been right to attack glob¬
alization as a new imperialism of the North over the South? Evidence
suggests that globalization to date has often reinforced arbitrary hierarchies
between North and South. However, as with class inequalities, unjust
outcomes in respect of North-South relations have often resulted from the



Globalization and (In)Equality 327


(mainly neoliberalist) policies that have been adopted in respect of global
spaces rather than from globality per se.

The general welfare gap between the South and the North has grown
during the contemporary period of accelerated globalization. Inequality
between countries has been calculated in at least seven different ways; yet all
but one of the formulas has suggested that the gap grew between 1980 and
2000(Wade,2004). True, as seen in Chapter 9, many populations in both the
North and the South have experienced various improvements in material
conditions during these decades. Yet the advances have generally been greater
in the already privileged North. As noted in the last chapter, a few previously
‘less-developed’ countries have during this period become NICs; however,
other lands of the South have seen little improvement - and in some cases an
actual decline - in the general welfare of their populations. These misfortunes
can be partly attributed to local and national circumstances of the countries
concerned, but globalization has also played a part in deepening
North-South inequality.

One way that globalization has widened North-South differentials is
through uneven access to global spaces. Pre-existent stratification has meant
that, like subordinated classes, disadvantaged countries have been less able to
share in the gains of global relations. For example, the great bulk of the infra¬
structure for global communications has been situated in the North. At the
turn of the century countries with the richest fifth of the world’s population
had 74 per cent of all telephone lines, while the poorest fifth had a mere 1.5
per cent (HDR, 1999: 3). In 1996 there were more telephones in Tokyo than
in the whole of Africa (FT, 7 June 1996: 3). The recent spread of mobile tele¬
phones in Africa has begun to improve matters, although as of 2003 still only
4 per cent of people in Africa had a mobile, as compared with 50 per cent in
Europe (Poulin, 2004).

The so-called ‘digital divide’ between North and South in respect of
information technology warrants particular mention (Everard, 1999; OECD,
2001; Warschauer, 2002). For example, a computer costs the average
Bangladeshi eight years’ wages, whereas the average American can purchase
the equipment with one month’s income (HDR, 1999: 6). As of 2000 Sub-
Saharan Africa counted less than 3 million Internet users, while the USA with
half the population of that region had 154 million users (Norris, 2001: 47).
Users in the South have also generally had a lower quality of Internet connec¬
tions in terms of smaller bandwidths and slower speeds. Southern contribu¬
tions to Internet content have been even smaller, so that these parts of the
world have normally been dependent data takers rather than proactive data
makers. Although the dominance of English in cyberspace has subsided
considerably since the late 1990s, some 90 per cent of both content and use of
the Internet remains in European and East Asian languages as of 2004
(Global Reach, 2004a; Internet, 2004). All of the 13 main route servers of the



328 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Internet are located in the North (one in Britain, one in Japan, and eleven in
the USA). Moreover, the rules governing cyber-traffic have been such that the
vast bulk of revenues from Internet use has flowed to the North, and the USA
more particularly.

Similar concerns should be anticipated in regard to emergent biological
and nano technologies. Already North-based biotechnology companies have
established positions of dominance over South-based customers for geneti¬
cally modified seeds. More generally, only a small percentage of medical
research funding goes to illnesses (most prevalent in the South) that account
for the lion’s share of the world burden of disease. On a similar pattern, the
next generation could bring far-reaching inequalities between countries that
do and do not have control of nanotechnologies.

Other North-South inequalities have prevailed in the mass media. True,
basic radio and television sets have spread to hundreds of millions of people
across the planet, but hundreds of millions of others, mostly in the South, still
lack access. Moreover, as with the Internet, Northern producers have
supplied the vast majority of broadcast material. Bollywood is an exceptional
Southern competitor for Hollywood and generally has only small audiences
outside India.

Countries of the South have also tended to have secondary participation in
global trade. Transworld products have circulated mostly in the North. For
instance, consumers in 13 countries of the North have accounted for 80 per
cent of the world market in music recordings (FT, 2 September 1996: 2). The
48 least developed countries, whose collective population accounted for
about 13 per cent of the world total in 1997, had shares in world exports and
imports that year of 0.4 and 0.6 per cent, respectively. Moreover, these
meagre figures represented a decline of more than 40 per cent since 1980
(UNCTAD, 2000). Absolute volumes of merchandise exports from the South
have grown substantially since 1980, but most of the countries remain
focused on primary commodities whose prices have declined over this period
(Morrissey and Filatotchev, 2000; UNCTAD, 2003).

With regard to global companies, the North as of 1995 held 75 per cent of
the total accumulated stock of FDI and also attracted most of new FDI flows
(Hirst and Thompson, 1999: 71). Moreover, when FDI went to the South in
the 1990s, it concentrated in just ten countries, bypassing the vast majority.
The least developed countries have attracted less than 1 per cent of recent
world FDI flows (UNCTAD, 2000).

In respect of money US, European and Japanese currencies have domi¬
nated global transactions, not the Brazilian real, the Indian rupee and the
South African Rand. The power of so-called ‘hard’ currencies is utterly arbi¬
trary and has conferred enormous privileges on people in their countries of
origin, especially the USA. While residents of the North have acquired several
hundred million global credit cards, the 1.2 billion inhabitants of China



Globalization and (In)Equality 329


between them held only 14 million of these plastic passes in the mid-1990s
(FT, 19 September 1996: 37). Although many offshore finance centres have
been ‘located’ (if sometimes only with brass plates) in the South, the tax
advantages of these operations have accrued principally to wealthy ‘hinwis’
who mostly reside in the North.

In global financial markets, countries of the South long ago lost the
substantial stream of transworld commercial bank loans that temporarily
flowed their way during the 1970s. In the mid-1990s clients based in the
North obtained nearly 90 per cent of new global borrowing (OECD, 1996a:
5). On a similar pattern, nearly three-quarters of both equity value and deriv¬
atives business were concentrated in the USA, Japan and Britain as of 1993
(Kidron and Segal, 1995: 70-1). True, global flows of securities to the South
increased from only $33 million in 1984 to $89,000 million in 1993 (Haley,
1999: 75). On the other hand, at the end of the 1990s only 25 governments of
the South had a credit rating that gave them access to global bond markets
(HDR, 1999: 31). To the (limited) extent that financial trading sites have
developed in so-called ‘emerging markets’ of the South, transworld electronic
transfers have ensured that investors based in the North frequently own most
of the assets and reap most of the profits. Moreover, when largely globally
induced financial crisis has hit the South - for example, in Latin America
1994-5, Asia 1997-8, Russia 1998, Brazil 1999 and Argentina 2001-2 -
investment houses based in the North have instantaneously withdrawn enor¬
mous funds.

Next to problems of uneven access, contemporary globalization has also
furthered growing North-South gaps insofar as neoliberalist policies have
discouraged public-sector interventions to counter this inequality of oppor¬
tunity. During the third quarter of the twentieth century many states of the
South attempted to promote ‘development’ with measures (like tariff protec¬
tion for infant industries) that sheltered local producers from world market
competition. At the same time most states of the North expanded
programmes of official development assistance as a modest measure to redis¬
tribute wealth between countries.

Neoliberalist critics have rejected ‘inward-looking’ macroeconomic
strategies and sometimes also ‘foreign aid’ as unhelpful disruptions to inher¬
ently progressive forces of the ‘free market’ (Bandowand Vasquez, 1994). On
the neoliberalist wave since the 1980s, states across the South have (to vary¬
ing degrees) reoriented their policies toward the world economy from protec¬
tion to liberalization. Meanwhile, fiscal constraints and the rigours of global
market competition have encouraged most governments in the North to
reduce concessionary resource transfers to the South. By 1995 overseas devel¬
opment assistance (ODA) amounted to only 0.27 per cent of the GNP of the
OECD countries, the lowest proportion since such statistics were first
collected in 1950 and also a significant decline in real terms (FT, 6 February



330 Nonnative and Policy Issues


1997: 5; UNCTAD, 2000). Although many OECD states have increased their
ODA ahead of inflation rates since 1997, the proportion of GDP was down
further to 0.25 per cent by 2003 (OECD, 2004: 64-5). Moreover, with the
addition of clients in the post-communist East, these smaller sums of ODA
have since the 1990s been spread across more potential recipients. The
NEPAD initiative agreed between the G8 and African governments in 2001 is
meant further to revive development support. Yet it will take far more to
regain earlier levels of ODA, let alone to reach the long proclaimed and
continually deferred UN target of 0.7 per cent of GDP.

Neoliberalists have rightly noted certain shortcomings in statist
approaches to ‘development’ and the often less than optimal use of ODA.
State ownership, government subsidies and statutory trade barriers have
frequently encouraged inefficiencies and - through various forms of corrup¬
tion - greater rather than less class inequality in the South. However, it is far
from clear that the neoliberalist prescription simply to withdraw public-
sector management of cross-border resource movements improves matters.
After all, certain kinds of state steering have arguably allowed countries like
the so-called ‘Asian tigers’ to narrow welfare gaps between themselves and
the North. Moreover, while preaching liberalization to the South, OECD
governments have retained many subsidies and other interventions in the
market that have helped to preserve and enlarge their advantages over poor
countries. As on earlier historical occasions, ‘free trade’ has often figured in
contemporary neoliberalist globalization as an ideology of the strong whom
it favours.

As for global regimes, these frameworks have on the whole promoted
neoliberalist formulas with little regard to the detrimental effects that such
policies might have on resource distribution between the North and the South.
In the area of global communications, for example, institutions like the ITU
and the WTO have concentrated on promoting ‘free’ flows of information.
Global regulations have given principal priority to harmonizing technical
standards and reducing statutory trade restrictions. Only secondary if any
consideration has gone to public policies that would improve the South’s
access to telecommunications and electronic mass media. Inequities of the
North-South digital divide have been recognized through the establishment of
the G8 Digital Opportunity Task Force (DOT Force) in 1999 and the proceed¬
ings of the ITU World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) in 2003-4.
However, concrete countermeasures have remained modest to date. Indeed,
when UNESCO in the late 1970s and early 1980s attacked arbitrary
North-South hierarchies with its proposals for a New World Information and
Communications Order, dominant states in the North suppressed the initia¬
tive. Neoliberalist governments in the UK and the USA went as far as to with¬
draw from the organization in 1984-5. The installation of a new leadership at
UNESCO in 1987 brought a return to more orthodox policy directions, but



Globalization and (In)Equality 331


even then Britain and the US did not rejoin the agency until 1997 and 2003,
respectively (Wells, 1987; Imber, 1989).

Like global rules governing communications, the global trade regime
centred on the GATT/WTO has focused primarily on liberalization, with
limited regard to the possibility that ‘free trade’ might work against an equit¬
able distribution of opportunities between countries. A so-called ‘open’ field
favours the strong market players, who have been disproportionately situ¬
ated in the North. Moreover, the GATT/WTO regime has over the half-
century of its existence generally proved quickest to liberalize in areas like
(most) manufactures and intellectual property where North-based interests
hope to exploit opportunities in the South. Progress has tended to be slower
in areas like agriculture and textiles where trade liberalization would give
South-based interests greater market access to the North. Governance of
global trade has therefore been riven with double standards that have usually
fallen to the disadvantage of the South.

Economic studies have generally agreed that most of the income gains
from the 1994 Uruguay Round agreements would accrue to the already
advantaged North (Dubey, 1996:14-16; Whalley, 1996: 428). For example,
a study commissioned by the OECD and the World Bank calculated that the
North would acquire 63.4 per cent of the income gains and that the new
arrangements would also increase the income gap between Africa and all
other regions (Goldin, 1993:142,205). The latest phase of multilateral trade
negotiations, the Doha Round launched in 2001, is purportedly committed to
a ‘Development Agenda’, but it is far from clear that the rhetoric will trans¬
late into meaningful pro-South outcomes.

The Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Agreement of the
WTO is also widely regarded as increasing South-North gaps (UNCTAD,
1996; South Centre, 1997; Correa, 2000; Maskus, 2000; CIPR, 2002).
Indeed, most governments of the South signed this accord before they
adequately understood its terms and implications. Adopted largely under
pressure from global pharmaceutical companies, TRIPS has put the cost of
access to advanced technologies and medicines beyond the reach of many
poor countries. At the same time, under TRIPS most income from patents,
copyrights and trademarks flows to the North. Moreover, global patents on
genetic material - henceforth to be guaranteed through the WTO - have given
‘bio-prospectors’ from the North control over, and income from, many vari¬
eties of plant life that originated in poor countries and with indigenous
peoples (Shiva, 1997). The Human Development Report has spoken in this
context of ‘a silent theft of centuries of knowledge’ (HDR, 1999: 68). Some
improved access for poor countries to essential medicines, particularly to
treat HIV/AIDS, was agreed on the eve of the 2003 WTO Ministerial
Conference, but it has seen little implementation to date, and TRIPS’ general
bias in favour of the North remains.



332 Nonnative and Policy Issues


True, several suprastate initiatives have stabilized prices and improved
access for exports of the South to the North. In this vein, the Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP) of the GATT has since the late 1960s offered
some Southern producers better access to Northern markets in certain goods.
Similarly, a succession of conventions between the EU and 71 African,
Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries since 1975 has aimed inter alia to
stabilize export earnings from the South to Europe. In addition, a
Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility was established through
the IMF in 1988 for countries that experience temporary shortfalls in export
earnings. However, the overall impact of these schemes has remained modest.

Outside official programmes, a number of alternative trading initiatives
have linked producers in the South directly with nonprofit buyers in the
North, thereby increasing the suppliers’ earnings. Examples of such
transworld NGO programmes include TWIN Trading and Traidcraft
Exchange. Another alternative trade scheme, PEOPLink, has used the
Internet to enable artisans from 42 countries of the South to sell their crafts
directly to consumers worldwide (PEOPLink, 2004). An International Fair
Trade Association was launched in 1989 and 15 years later grouped over 220
initiatives in 59 countries (IFAT, 2004). Nevertheless, these inspirational
efforts have accounted for only a miniscule proportion of total world trade.

Meanwhile, proposals for a more comprehensive redistribution of the gains
of global commerce have stalled. Reform of North-South trade lay at the heart
of the unsuccessful campaign of the 1970s for a so-called New International
Economic Order (NIEO) (Bhagwati, 1977; Sauvant and Hasenpflug, 1977).
Even OPEC’s quadrupling of oil prices in 1973 only reestablished the earlier
level relative to manufactures, and the rate per barrel subsequently fell back to
pre-1973 rates (Singer, 1995:23). Many Northern agricultural subsidies remain
in place, and steps to dismantle the protectionist Multi-Fibre Arrangement
(MFA) dragged for years until its termination in 2005. In the 1990s barriers to
trade in the North were estimated to cost the South twice the value of all devel¬
opment aid (Carlsson et al., 1995: 166). Today countries of the North spend
$311 billion per annum to subsidize their farmers while committing only $52
billion to ODA (Drache and Froese, 2003:10). ‘Generosity’, indeed.

Further inequities in North-South relations have developed out of the
regimes that govern global finance. In this issue-area, too, regulators have
accorded priority to liberalization rather than equity (or they have assumed
simplistically and uncritically that an ‘open’ economy automatically gener¬
ates a just distribution). Neoliberalist policies have mainly removed statutory
restrictions, for instance, on foreign exchange transactions, capital flows
between countries, foreign ownership of financial assets, and so on. When the
allocation of global loans and bonds is left to ‘market forces’, credit goes
disproportionately to borrowers with the greatest means to repay. Moreover,
in the market higher credit risks attract higher borrowing costs, so that the



Globalization and (In)Equality 333


countries most in need of funds have tended to pay the highest charges. As
seen in Chapter 9, some initiatives in global financial governance have sought
to reduce the risks of systemic breakdown. However, the regulation of global
finance has to date neglected questions of structurally unequal access
between countries. The UN Financing for Development initiative has since
1997 sought to make global finance serve the South rather than the other way
around, but as yet to little avail.

The North-South distribution of pains in global finance has likewise been
unjust. Consider approaches adopted through the IMF and the London Club
to ‘resolve’ the global commercial debt crisis of the 1980s. The losses fell far
more heavily on borrowing governments in the South than on lending banks
in the North. Indeed, in 1990 the interest on transworld debt due from the
South to the North ($112 billion) amounted to nearly three times the flow of
bilateral ODA from the North to the South ($41 billion) (Harrod, 1992:
106). Notwithstanding various initiatives since the late 1980s to reduce the
burden of debt repayments, the scale of net South-to-North transfers in
respect of official and commercial global loans has exceeded anything previ¬
ously witnessed, including during colonial times.

Since the mid-1990s governments, firms and peoples of the South have also
borne the brunt of the pain in financially driven economic crises in Asia, Latin
America and Russia. Multilateral financial agencies have usually laid the
blame for these misfortunes on flaws on the domestic laws and institutions of
the affected countries. Accordingly the lion’s share of recovery costs and
corrective measures have applied to the South. In contrast, global regulators
have generally underplayed the role in these crises of liberalized transplanetary
capital flows. Hence global banks and investment companies (who hold
mainly North-based funds) have avoided even the idea of contributing to the
public costs of these downturns in ‘emerging markets’, for example, in terms
of the alleviation of increased unemployment and destitution. Along similar
lines, if a global bond-rating agency downgrades a poor country on the basis
of faulty intelligence, the unfortunate victim has no way to recoup the damages
that it suffers in terms of increased interest charges on its transworld debts.

The preceding remarks concerning global regimes are not meant to
discount initiatives throughout much of the UN system since the 1960s to
address issues of North-South inequity. Bodies like the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (launched in 1964) and the United
Nations Development Programme (created in 1965) have produced valuable
research on North-South relations. These institutions have also helped more
generally to keep questions of social justice on the global agenda. Yet since
the 1980s UN agencies have generally taken a back seat in global economic
governance. The initiative has lain far more with the Bretton Woods institu¬
tions and other organizations like the OECD and the WTO that have oper¬
ated outside the UN purview.



334 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Since official channels have largely failed to address - and indeed have
often exacerbated - unjust distribution between the North and the South
under contemporary globalization, one might expect social movements to
have risen up in protest. After all, starting in the 1920s a global anticolonial
coalition powerfully linked nationalists and socialists from across the South
with various supporters in the North. Yet this progressive alliance largely
dissipated after formal decolonization. To some extent certain faith-based
associations, development NGOs and women’s networks have taken the
struggle against what was once popularly called imperialism forward into the
twenty-first century. Owing in good part to these civil society efforts, many
people would today broadly accept that countries have a ‘right of develop¬
ment’. Yet active citizen participation in development promotion has on the
whole remained limited. Meanwhile, other new social movements (for exam¬
ple, in respect of consumer protection, environmental conservation, and
human rights) have usually not put questions of North-South equity high on
their agenda.

On the whole, then, contemporary accelerated globalization has had
unhappy consequences for the distribution of human life chances between
countries. Inhabitants of the already privileged North have amassed dispro¬
portionate shares of the fruits of increased globality, largely on account of the
accident of their country of birth. Currently prevailing state and suprastate
policy frameworks have sooner reinforced than countered this structural
inequality of opportunity, and to date social movement protests against
growing North-South gaps have generally been weak and ineffectual.
However, to repeat the key point, this dismal trend in injustice between coun¬
tries has not been inherent in globalization. In particular, stronger social
movements and alternative regulatory arrangements could yield more just
outcomes.


Gender inequalities

In addition to highlighting problems of class and country hierarchies, a
number of critics of contemporary globalization have (as noted in Chapter 1)
alleged that the trend has perpetuated, if not exacerbated, the structural
subordination of women to men. Feminist analyses in particular have high¬
lighted the significance in globalization of gender inequity, that is, injustices
that result from particular social constructions of femininity and masculinity.
It is clearly arbitrary and unfair that biological and psychological differences
between sexes become grounds for social inequalities.

Like class and North-South relations, gender refers to broad social
patterns. Thus, just as certain individuals from underprivileged classes have
beaten the odds to reach positions of influence, and just as certain countries



Globalization and (In)Equality 335


of the South have attained accelerated ‘development’, so certain women have
overcome gender obstacles to become leading managers, politicians and
professionals. Yet exceptions at the level of individual women - as exceptions
- sooner demonstrate than disprove the existence of social hierarchies on
gender lines. Moreover, the ‘successful’ women have often achieved their
accomplishments through the adoption of masculine behaviours.

The structural dominance of men over women is of course hardly new to
the contemporary period of accelerated globalization. Patriarchy (as some
analysts prefer to call this gender subordination) has a long history and had
become embedded in most social contexts across the world before the prolif¬
eration of transplanetary connections in the past half-century. Globalization
is no more the original source of gender injustice than it has been the well-
spring of class or country stratifications. Yet has contemporary globalization
intensified gender injustice, like it has often helped to widen class gaps and
North-South hierarchies?

Trends in gender inequality are rather difficult to specify empirically. Even
after several decades of social research on women and gender, most investi¬
gations (including most globalization studies) have continued to overlook
these issues. Researchers have only recently begun systematically to assemble
gender-based social data; hence few precise statistical indicators run histori¬
cally from before, and then across, the period of accelerated globalization.

These limitations noted, it appears that, in a positive vein, some significant
reductions have occurred since 1970 in gender gaps with respect to accessing
health and education services (HDR, 1995: 3). For instance, the worldwide
rate of girls’ enrolment in secondary school rose from 36 per cent in 1990 to
61 per cent in 1997 (HDR, 1999: 22). By 2000 the world level of primary
school enrolment for girls (79 per cent) was getting close to that for boys (85
per cent), though it remained highly uneven in some areas such as South Asia
(UNICEF, 2003a: 39). In many parts of the world women have also gained
greater access to paid employment. For example, participation in waged
labour increased in the OECD countries from 48.3 per cent of women in 1973
to 60 per cent in 1990 (Simai, 1995: 12). In Western Europe between the
1970s and the 1990s, male jobs declined by one million while female employ¬
ment grew by 13 million. Unskilled male workers have been particularly
vulnerable to job insecurity in the contemporary globalizing economy
(Wood, 1994). Moreover, between 1978 and 1988 the median wage of
women workers in the North rose from 43 per cent to 54 per cent of the level
for men (Lang and Hines, 1993: 74). In countries such as Germany, Sweden
and the USA, women have since the 1960s obtained a larger proportion
(albeit still a clear minority) of professional and managerial posts (Esping-
Andersen, 1990: 212).

However, such improvements have remained far short of full equity.
When researchers calculated a gender-related development index (GDI) for



336 Nonnative and Policy Issues


the 1995 Human Development Report, none of the 130 countries covered
showed women to have equal opportunities with men (HDR, 1995: 2). Very
often women still do not receive equal pay with men for the same work. In the
former communist countries the position of women has generally deterio¬
rated - both in absolute terms and relative to men - in respect of reproductive
rights, employment opportunities, caring burdens, and participation in repre¬
sentative institutions (Einhorn, 1993; Funk and Mueller, 1993; Moghadam,
1993). In the 1990s almost 70 per cent of the world’s poor people were
female, and many girls in the South still lacked access to formal education
(HDR, 1995: 36; Rivera etal., 1995: 12).

Yet what specific role, if any, has globalization played in the continuities
and changes of gender hierarchies in contemporary history? Available
evidence suggests mixed consequences. In regard to employment, global capi¬
talism has in several respects significantly boosted women’s opportunities to
undertake paid work. For one thing, female labour has figured prominently
in the expanding service economy of global information, global communica¬
tions, global retailing and global finance. Women have also occupied a large
proportion of jobs in global manufacturing operations. For example, 4
million women held positions in 200 EPZs in the South alone as of 1994, up
from 1.3 million in 1986 (Joekes and Weston, 1994: 37). Moreover, in the
1990s women in the maquiladora plants began to rise to some management
positions (Suarez Aguilar, 1999). Increased trade, particularly within global
production chains for clothing, has apparently narrowed wage inequalities
between women and men in Bangladesh; however, increased trade in Zambia
would seem to have widened this gender gap (Fontana, 2003).

That said, increased access for women to wage labour through global
markets has also had downsides. After all, many of the new feminized work¬
places in finance, information and communication sectors have had the qual¬
ity of ‘electronic sweatshops’, with high stress and low remuneration. Fargely
owing to occupational sex-typing in global finance, men have taken most of
the high salaries in management and on the trading floor, whereas women
have provided most of the low-paid clerical support in the backroom
(McDowell and Court, 1994). Any peek into an airport executive lounge
reveals that women have gained relatively few places in global management
circles.

True, jobs in global production through EPZs have often offered women
better pay and benefits than other work (Tim, 1990), yet many of the posi¬
tions have come with highly ‘flexible’ labour conditions. Moreover, the
1990s have witnessed some ‘remasculinization’ of the maquiladora work¬
forces: partly due to a shortage of female labour; and partly owing to
increased automation of the plants (with the stereotypical assumption that
only men can handle heavy machinery) (Runyan, 1996: 240; Suarez Aguilar,
1999).



Globalization and (In)Equality 337


Still more dubious turns in gendered employment patterns have arisen in
informal sectors of the global economy. Expanded transworld markets in
domestics, mail-order brides, and sex workers have also enlarged job ‘oppor¬
tunities’ for (mainly poor) women (Pettman, 1997; Skrobanek et al., 1997;
Kempadoo and Doezema, 1998; Anderson, 2000; Ehrenreich and
Hochschild, 2002). For example, between 1988 and 1992 some 286,000
Filipinas and 50,000 Thai women arrived in Japan as ‘entertainers’ (Pettman,
1996: 197). Many migrant female domestic workers have suffered bodily
violence as well as unacceptably arduous labour, although these problems
have not as yet been systematically documented on a global scale.

Finally, women who have gained paid employment in the global economy
have usually not lost other labour burdens in the process. Most have retained
at least a second (unremunerated) job of family care. Some have furthermore
kept a third job of household food cultivation. Such workloads have gener¬
ally left the women concerned with little time or energy for a fourth job,
namely, of political mobilization to improve their lot.

In sum, then, globalization to date has had mixed results for gender justice
in respect of employment opportunities. On the one hand, global capitalism
has substantially increased women’s access to paid labour. On the other
hand, particularly in the North, the terms attached to these jobs have gener¬
ally been inferior to the conditions obtained by the preceding generation of
(mainly male) workers. Meanwhile women across the world have tended to
retain unpaid household chores as they have acquired greater waged work
outside the home.

On issues other than employment, contemporary globalization has gener¬
ally done little to reverse gender-based hierarchies of opportunity. For exam¬
ple, global finance has if anything exacerbated the exclusion of women from
credit markets relative to men (Staveren, 2002; Porter, 2005: ch 10). True,
several bilateral and multilateral agencies have, together with local advocacy
groups, promoted innovative micro-credit schemes that have in particular
offered poor women in the South increased borrowing facilities. However,
the sums involved in these programmes have been tiny next to the huge flows
of mainstream - ‘malestream’ - global finance capital.

Gender stratification has also persisted in regard to global communica¬
tions. Various studies have shown that, in almost all countries (a few like
France and Turkey being exceptions), men have formed a large majority of
Internet users. As of the late 1990s, women made up 38 per cent of users in
the USA, 25 per cent in Brazil, 16 per cent in Russia and 4 per cent in Arab
countries (HDR, 1999: 62). On the other hand, some recent evidence
suggests that gender gaps in Internet access are closing (Fekhi, 2000).
Certainly multiple initiatives have called attention to the problem, including
the Women’s Networking Support Programme of the Association for
Progressive Communications; the Working Group on Gender Issues of the



338 Nonnative and Policy Issues


ITU; and the Gender Caucus and the NGO Gender Strategies Working
Group at the WSIS.

However, access is only part of the problem of gender justice in global
communications. The new technologies have often broadened the scope for
sexist violence against women, for example, through web-based pornogra¬
phy, entrapment via email, and offensive text messaging. Sexist language and
images have also pervaded much of the global mass media. Women have
generally been absent from executive positions in ICT industries, and men
have constituted the vast majority of directors and producers in the mass
media (UNESCO, 1987). For example, only 7 per cent of Hollywood direc¬
tors are female (Financial Times, 8 March 2005). These inequalities have
limited women’s influence on constructions of gender through global
communications.

Along with unequal access to transworld spaces, contemporary globaliza¬
tion has also perpetuated and sometimes deepened gender hierarchies in the
second general way named earlier, that is, through neoliberalist restructuring
of the state. True, gender discrimination has recently become a more explicit
concern in the economic and social development plans of many countries.
Some states have moreover designated special ministers or even (in the case of
Uganda, for example) created a distinct ministry specifically to address the
status of women. However, the contraction of state services in line with
neoliberalist prescriptions has tended to hurt women more than men. As the
principal homemakers and carers, women have suffered disproportionately
when the state has cut benefits for vulnerable citizens, reduced spending on
health and education, decreased subsidies on food, lowered maternity and
child care entitlements, and so forth. Likewise, the privatization of pension
provisions has tended to disadvantage women, since they generally have
lower incomes and shorter earning lives. In spite of substantial academic
research on these negative gender impacts (as referenced in Chapter 1), to this
day programmes of neoliberalist economic reform only rarely make even a
passing mention of gender issues. Meanwhile, although relevant data are not
available, the suspicion must be that gains in ownership and income from the
privatization of industries have generally flowed disproportionately to men.

Trends in the treatment of gender stratification by global regimes have
shown some positive signs, but the overall impact has again been mixed. In
terms of progress, a number of suprastate legal instruments have put the spot¬
light on gender hierarchies. Examples include the 1979 Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and
several equal opportunity directives of the EU. The UN Convention for the
Suppression of Traffic in Persons and the Exploitation of the Prostitution of
Others, approved by the General Assembly in 1949, has over the years
attracted 70 state ratifications (HDR, 1999:103). The United Nations and its
specialized agencies have also run a number of programmes to combat gender



Globalization and (In)Equality 339


subordination, particularly through the UN Decade for Women in 1976-85
and six global conferences on women between 1975 and 2005 (Winslow,
1995; Pietila and Vickers, 1996). Multilateral development programmes
have also targeted certain projects specifically to advance the position of
women. For example, the World Bank spent $1 billion on education and
training of women in 1995, triple the amount expended annually under this
heading in the 1980s (Balleroni, 1995).

However, women-centred initiatives have on the whole remained rela¬
tively marginal in global governance. Most suprastate agencies have at best
relegated gender issues to a small and marginal office. For example, the
United Nations created a fund for women in development at the launch of the
Decade for Women, but thirty years later this programme, called UNIFEM,
still had a modest annual budget of only $35 million (UNIFEM, 2004: 20).
No World Gender Organization has emerged to complement the ILO on
labour issues or UNCTAD on North-South questions. Meanwhile, global
economic institutions like the World Bank have generally shown at best
limited recognition of gender issues as they have promoted policies of neolib-
eralist restructuring (O’Brien et ai, 2000: ch 2).

Contemporary globalization has had some distinctly hopeful consequences
for gender justice through the rise of transplanetary social movements. As
noted in Chapter 3, civil society campaigns for women’s rights have involved
transworld networks since the late nineteenth century. However, global move¬
ments for gender justice have especially proliferated and grown in recent
decades, as evidenced by the attendance of over 30,000 women at the Fourth
United Nations Conference on Women, convened at Beijing in 1995 (Mawle,
1997:155).A number of global mobilizations in respect of development coop¬
eration, ecological sustainability and human rights have also emphasized
concerns about gender hierarchies (Bunch and Reilly, 1994; Rowbotham and
Linkogle, 2001). To date, however, most of these civil society initiatives have
found it difficult to move people beyond a recognition of women’s subordina¬
tion to a commitment to implement concrete corrective steps.

In summary, contemporary globalization has had mixed impacts on
gender inequality. In a positive direction, global capitalism has increased
women’s opportunities for paid employment; global governance has intro¬
duced a number of legal and institutional initiatives to promote the status of
women; and global civil society has provided increased means to mobilize for
gender equity. In a negative direction, gender stratification has limited
women’s access to many other global spaces; much female labour in the
global economy has had poor conditions; and the costs of neoliberalist global
economic restructuring have tended to fall disproportionately on women.
Thus globalization has shown potentials to do both good and ill for gender
justice. The challenge for future action is to devise policies that expand the
gains and reduce the harms.



340 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Other inequalities

Most research and argument about contemporary globalization and equality
has addressed social hierarchies related to class, country and gender.
However, stratification in global relations has extended to other social axes
as well. Casual observation readily suggests that further arbitrary subordina¬
tions have existed in global spaces with respect to race, faith, urban/rural
divides, age groups and disability. Regrettably, little specific data and analy¬
sis is currently available on the disproportionate effects of transplanetary
flows along these lines. The relative brevity of the following remarks reflects
this paucity of research and is not meant to suggest that discriminations
related to race, religion, urban/rural gaps, age and disability are necessarily
less severe or less important than those related to class, country and gender.

Indeed, the different categories have often overlapped and reinforced one
another. For example, racial and religious hierarchies have frequently figured
in North-South stratification. Likewise, class stratification has readily
compounded the marginalization of rural cultivators. Gender and age hierar¬
chies have combined to make the position of girls still more vulnerable than
that of boys.

To be sure, categories of race, faith, urban/rural divides, age and disability
are as ambiguous and contested as those of class, North-South divides, and
gender. Nevertheless, it is apparent that, on the whole, people of colour have
- both within and between countries - generally had smaller life chances than
white people. Although globalization provides great opportunities for inter-
cultural interchange, Judaeo-Christian traditions have tended to enjoy privi¬
leged positions on the main road, while other civilizations have occupied side
streets and rarely visited cul-de-sacs (Nahavandian, 2004). The Christian
calendar tends to define global time, for example. Likewise, exceptions duly
noted, rural people have more usually suffered deprivation than city dwellers
in the contemporary world. Across the continents, too, vulnerable age groups
have often lacked adequate social protection, so that children and the elderly
have experienced higher incidences of malnutrition, preventable illnesses and
abuse than able-bodied adults.

Contemporary globalization has affected these hierarchies in the same
broad ways that have been distinguished above with regard to class, country
and gender. In terms of access to global spaces, for example, a number of crit¬
ics have argued that contemporary society has been marked by ‘global
apartheid’, where race forms a principal, arbitrary determinant of inclusion
and marginalization (Falk, 1993; Mazrui, 1994; Richmond, 1994;
Alexander, 1996; Castles, 2000). Unfortunately, research to date has
produced little precise data to demonstrate racial hierarchies in access to
global communications, global products, global finance and the like. Nor has
a ‘race and development indicator’ appeared to complement similar statistics



Globalization and (In)Equality 341


(problematic though they may be) for countries and sexes. Nevertheless,
studies suggest that African Americans and Latinos have perceived greater
threats from globalization to their wages and employment than other racial
groups in the USA (Dawson, 1999). Racial stratification has arguably also
been manifest when the mainstream mass media continually portrays Sub-
Saharan Africa as only weak, poor and violent. Substantial anecdotal
evidence suggests that people of colour have experienced institutional racism
in the hiring and promotion practices of some global organizations. Racism
in global travel is apparent to anyone queuing at a border checkpoint.

As for the dominance of town over countryside, rural settlements have
tended to be marginalized in contemporary globalization relative to urban
centres. This is not to suggest that global connectivity has benefited all city
dwellers, at a time when rapid urbanization has left over 900 million people
across the planet living in slums as of 2001 (HABITAT, 2003). Nevertheless,
when the NICs have taken advantage of global production and markets to
advance ‘development’, their cities have usually taken the lion’s share of the
benefits, while much rural poverty has remained relatively untouched. For
example, in China metropolises such as Shanghai and Tianjin have seen
marked rises in human development indicators, while the north-western
areas of the country have had only a fifth the rate of economic growth (HDR,
2003: 62). Across the North, the South and the East, global communications,
global markets, global finance and global organizations have used metropol¬
itan centres as their primary nodes. For example, following deregulation of
the telephone industry and the withdrawal of subsidies, telecommunications
companies in the USA focused their services on urban concentrations (Lloyd,
1998). It may well be that, as the Unwiring the World Project at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab has enthusiastically
declared, ‘it can now be cheaper to have first-class communications in the
rural village than in Manhattan’ (MIT, 2004). Some netizens do indeed exist
among the rural poor, including the nearly 70,000 villagers in the Dhar
district of the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh who accessed a
specially designed community intranet during the first 18 months of its oper¬
ation in 2000-1 (Rajora, 2001). Yet such cases are exceptional. The cost of
global communications remains well out of reach for most of the world’s low-
income rural people.

Meanwhile global agro-food industries have tended to weaken the often
already precarious position of small-scale cultivators across the planet. The
big corporate players have commanded high technologies, large credit facili¬
ties and advanced management techniques that traditional farmers have
lacked. True, some smallholders have exploited the opportunities of global¬
ization to their benefit. For example, peasants in the interior of South
Sumatra have used radio reports on the BBC world service to determine the
optimal moment, in terms of prices, to take their produce to market (Galizia,



342 Nonnative and Policy Issues


1993). Yet such enterprising initiatives have been no match for the sophisti¬
cated market intelligence available to global companies. Meanwhile other
farmers in the South have used the possibilities of global marketing to supply
affluent consumers in the North with speciality crops and off-season fruits
and vegetables (Llambi, 1994). However, this practice has dubious ecological
rationality and can moreover reduce local food security when the cultivators
in question neglect their staple crops and become dependent on (relatively
expensive) imports.

In terms of age groups, contemporary globalization has in some ways
tended to exclude older generations. For example, many workers over 40
have found it difficult to retool their skills in the face of global economic
restructuring. As a result, permanent unemployment has loomed for
substantial numbers of middle-aged people, especially in the rust belts of the
North and the former centrally planned economies. In addition, many
(though by no means all) older persons have found computer technologies
daunting, thereby producing a considerable age bias in cyberspace. In
contrast, certain technologies of globalization have in some ways offered
children counterweights in their general subordination to adults. For
instance, many young people have acquired more highly developed audio¬
visual literacy than older generations. Youth have likewise tended to access
computers and advanced telecommunications with greater ease than their
parents and teachers. For children, then, global communications can offer
opportunities of empowerment. On the other hand, globally operating
NGOs have often compromised the dignity of voiceless vulnerable children
with degrading images in relief and development appeals through the mass
media.

Contemporary globalization has similarly opened a number of opportuni¬
ties to advance the lot of disabled persons. To be sure, ‘ablism’ has deter¬
mined that most expansion of global spaces has occurred without regard to
the needs of mentally and physically handicapped people. However, global¬
ization has also involved human rights instruments, electronic communica¬
tions, and transworld associations that have been used to advance the causes
of disabled persons.

On the other hand, as already seen earlier with respect to class and gender,
neoliberalist economic restructuring in the face of globalization has often
hurt subordinated social circles. For example, people of colour have consti¬
tuted a disproportionately high share of low-paid and unemployed workers;
thus when ‘global competition’ has prompted reductions in state welfare enti¬
tlements, the pains have often been racially skewed. Moreover, popular fears
of globalization’s purported negative consequences for social welfare have
often taken racist expressions, including objections to ‘floods’ of immigrants
(Oloka-Onyango, 1999). On the age front, the young and the elderly have
been particularly vulnerable during economic restructuring in the East and



Globalization and (In)Equality 343


the South. Indeed, the harmful repercussions for children of the 1980s global
debt crisis led UNICEF to spearhead calls for ‘adjustment with a human face’
(Cornia et al., 1987-8). More recently, the Asia crisis of the late 1990s
brought decreased school attendance and increased child malnutrition in
some areas (Brown, 1999).

Meanwhile neoliberalist restructuring of agriculture - substantially spon¬
sored by the Bretton Woods institutions and the WTO regime - has had
mixed impacts on vulnerable smallholders. On the one hand, the liberaliza¬
tion of agricultural marketing has in some countries like Uganda freed culti¬
vators from inefficient and oppressive state bureaux that previously denied
farmers adequate earnings for their cash crops. On the other hand, structural
reforms in Mexico have seen the government withdraw a number of crucial
supports for poor farmers (Myhre, 1994). More generally, critics have
worried that liberalization of agricultural trade is favouring strong corporate
players and making little provision to help millions of ‘inefficient’ cultivators,
especially in the South, to develop new livelihoods.

Fewer doubts exist regarding the benefits of the global human rights
regime as an instrument against race and age discriminations. For example,
concerted efforts through the United Nations against apartheid helped to
bring down the racist order in South Africa. Meanwhile the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
supported by a Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
(CERD), has since 1969 promoted racial equity in the world generally. In
2001 the UN sponsored a World Conference Against Racism, held in
Durban, South Africa, although only 14 heads of state and government
attended.

Children’s entitlements have been included in the global human rights
regime through the Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the
UN General Assembly in 1989. This treaty, also overseen by a Geneva-based
committee of experts, obtained ratifications in record time and is now, with
over 190 state signatories, ‘the most universally embraced human rights
instrument in history’ (UNICEF, 1998: 21). Only Somalia and the USA have
not acceded to the convention. However, poor resourcing in terms of limited
funds and personnel has so far restricted the enforceability of the treaty. For
example, the Convention asserts a child’s right to be registered immediately
after birth, but UNICEF estimates that in 2000 around 41 per cent of births
worldwide went unregistered (UNICEF, 2003a).

Global governance agencies have also promoted the position of children in
other ways. For example, the UN-sponsored World Summit for Children in
September 1990 attracted 71 heads of state and government and agreed
several dozen specific targets for improving the lot of young people before the
turn of the century (UNICEF, 1991: 72-4). Thanks largely to the efforts of
UNICEF and the WHO, child immunization coverage in the South increased



344 Nonnative and Policy Issues


from 15 per cent in 1980 to 80 per cent in 1990, saving over 12 million lives
(UNICEF, 1991:1, 3, 14). UNICEF has furthermore promoted breast-feed¬
ing, basic health and education for children, safe water and sanitation, care
and support for mothers, high-quality family planning information and
services, and the protection of children from abuse in households, work¬
places, city slums, and war.

On the whole, however, global policymakers have not had children in their
sights. Outside UNICEF, global governance agencies have rarely highlighted
the specific needs of young people. It seems telling when a porter at the
Marriott Hotel in Manhattan reports that he has never in his many years of
employment seen a child lodging among the global managers (Escorcia,
1999). Meanwhile no quarter of transworld governance has attended at
length to the distinctive problems of older age groups in globalization.

As with regard to poor countries, workers and women, a number of trans-
border social movements have sought to advance the causes of subordinated
races, marginalized rural populations, and children (Starr, 2003). For exam¬
ple, the global Anti-Apartheid Movement was an influential civil society
component of the struggle for racial justice in South Africa. Indigenous
peoples have employed transworld coalitions to strengthen their political
voice. Via Campesina has promoted solidarity among peasants across all
hemispheres (Desmarais, 2002). Global campaigns against child labour have
also booked some successes. On the other hand, no global advocacy of note
has promoted questions of social justice for the elderly, and transworld
mobilizations for disabled people have generally attracted limited followings
or media attention.


Conclusion

As shown in the summary box, the preceding examination of various forms
of social stratification suggests that contemporary globalization has in vari¬
ous respects tended to perpetuate and sometimes also to accentuate the
inequities that result from arbitrary hierarchies of life chances among people.
The reduction of territorial barriers has not brought with it a reduction of
social barriers. Classes, countries, sexes, races, urban/rural districts, genera¬
tions and (dis)abled persons have had structurally unequal opportunities to
shape the course of globalization, to share in its benefits, and to mitigate or
avoid its pains.

Which of these structural subordinations is most important - and thus
should be the primary focus of efforts to build a more equitable globaliza¬
tion? Different theories (reviewed in Chapter 4) and associated political
strategies offer different answers to this key question. On the one hand,
commentators who draw on Marxist frames of reference put the greatest



Globalization and (In)Equality 345


Globalization and (in)equality in summary

Stratified access to global spaces

• concentration of global communications on professional and proper¬
tied classes, countries of the North, men, urban dwellers and younger
generations

• increased opportunities for women’s employment, albeit often on lower
terms and conditions than men

• global money and credit disproportionately available to already privi¬
leged circles

• offshore finance facilities effectively reserved to the wealthy

• concentration of global investments in the North and in cities

• predominance in the management of global organizations of middle-
aged, white, urban men from the North and propertied classes

Decline of the redistributive state

• retreats from progressive taxation, with consequent widening of class
gaps

• reduction in state-supplied social services, with disproportionately
harmful effects on the disabled, children, the elderly, women, people of
colour and less advantaged classes

• contraction of ODA under the pressures of ‘global competition’

Social hierarchies in global regimes

• many global economic institutions have given at best passing attention
to issues of social equality

• the ‘free flow of information’ principle in global communications has
favoured dominant social circles

• the Uruguay Round and the WTO have disproportionately advantaged
North-based interests

• the management of crises in global finance has generally favoured cred¬
itors (mostly in the North and usually wealthy) over debtors (mostly in
the South and often poor)

Resistance to arbitrary hierarchies through global social movements

• persistent reliance on mainly territorial and national organization has
weakened labour movements in the face of global capital

• many global NGOs and faith-based groups have highlighted inequities
in North-South relations

• global women’s networks have promoted awareness of gender justice
issues

• global human rights movements have advanced causes of racial equity,
child protection, and opportunities for the disabled




346 Nonnative and Policy Issues


emphasis on class oppressions resultant from capitalism. In contrast, schools
of thought such as political realism, dependency theory and world-system
analysis give foremost attention to country and state hierarchies.
Poststructuralists and religious revivalists look first of all to cultural stratifi¬
cations imposed by modern rationalism. Feminists start with gender subordi¬
nations, while black liberation movements direct the spotlight to racial
hierarchies. Social inequalities for young people, sexual minorities and
disabled persons are generally most apparent to, and most sorely felt by,
those groups themselves.

Hence there is no definitive rank order of inequalities in the contemporary
globalizing world upon which everyone will agree. All of these arbitrary hier¬
archies produce significant injustice and suffering. Each demands corrective
action. Moreover, none of the social hierarchies in global relations holds the
key to completely resolving the others. After all, anticolonial struggles have
not halted gender subordinations. Likewise, successful class resistance does
not eliminate cultural and racial stratifications. The various structural
inequalities in current globalization have significant overlap and mutual rein¬
forcement, but they cannot be reduced to a single problem whose resolution
would be a panacea for global social justice. Where one puts the emphasis -
on class, country, culture, gender or some other social hierarchy - is a matter
of personal judgement, as shaped by one’s theoretical perspective and politi¬
cal commitments.

Whatever position each reader might choose to adopt, however, the
general point to remember is that, as said at the outset of this chapter, global¬
ization has not been the original cause of social inequalities. Nor has the rise
of transplanetary connections been the only circumstance promoting social
stratifications in contemporary history. Global relations - as a particular
aspect of social geography - have not intrinsically discriminated between
classes, countries, sexes, races, urban and rural areas, age groups, and the
able-bodied and disabled. Yes, globalization can sustain and even increase
social injustices, but such results only emerge when globalization is managed
with policy frameworks that encourage unfair outcomes.

In short, it is not globalization per se that matters so much as the ways
that the trend is handled. As seen in Part II of this book, the growth of
transworld domains has involved new forms of capitalism and new forms of
governance. Capitalism has always held potentials both for social progress
and for social injustice. The mix of actual results has depended largely on the
mode of regulation employed. Contemporary intense globalization has
promoted greater unfairness not because of the changed geography itself,
but mainly because of the accompanying broad policy shift since the 1970s
from welfarism to neoliberalism. The implicit neoliberalist assumption that
‘free’ markets maximize equity as they maximize efficiency is fundamentally
flawed. As shown above, most recent indicators suggest that neoliberalist



Globalization and (In)Equality 347


preoccupations with competition, productivity and economic growth have
exacerbated social inequalities.

To indict neoliberalism is not to advocate a return to old-style welfarism.
The new contours of governance consequent upon globalization have
rendered that statist approach unsustainable. However, neoliberalism is not
the only policy approach available to the contemporary globalizing world.
The challenge - as elaborated in Chapter 12 - is to formulate and implement
workable alternatives, so that recent growth in gaps gives way to longer-term
narrowing of inequalities.



Chapter 11

Globalization and (Un)Democracy

Main points of this chapter

The limits of statist liberal democracy

Citizen ignorance

Institutional process failures

Structural inequalities

Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• the conventional framework of liberal democracy, with its focus on
national self-determination through a territorial state, is not an adequate
formula for 'rule by the people' in the polycentric governance of a more
global world

• widespread ignorance among citizens about globalization and its
governance has severely restricted the possibilities for democratic regula¬
tion of transplanetary relations

• across state, substate, suprastate and private regulatory institutions, the
decision-taking processes that govern globalization have shown major
shortfalls of public participation and accountability

• deeply entrenched structural inequalities (along the various lines
discussed in Chapter 10) have highly skewed opportunities of citizen
involvement in the governance of contemporary globalization


Next to - and deeply intertwined with - human security and social equality,
democracy is a third core normative concern in respect of contemporary glob¬
alization. As noted in Chapter 1, widespread feelings that people lack choice
and control with respect to globalization have aroused considerable disquiet
about the process. Along with worries about insecurity and inequality,
discontents about democratic deficits have fuelled much opposition to
prevailing policies of globalization. In recent conversations with some 400
civil society actors across a wide spectrum of regional locations, social
sectors, and political persuasions, almost all of them found democracy
severely wanting in globalization today (Scholte, 2004b: ch 2).

Commentators have long drawn links between globalization and demo¬
cracy. The term ‘globalism’ was in its first usage coupled with a purported


348




Globalization and (Un)Democracy 349


process of worldwide democratization. Back in the 1940s Reiser and Davies
anticipated stark alternative futures of ‘global slavery or global freedom’.
They urged coming generations ‘to build a democratic world order on a plan¬
etary scale’ (1944: xi, 57). How have actual developments in globalization
unfolded over the 60 years since then?

To assess conditions of democracy under contemporary globalization it is
first of all necessary to clarify terms. Democracy is no more susceptible to a
single, universal, fixed, and final definition than any other key concept. On
the contrary, notions of rule (‘kratia’) by the people (‘demos’) have varied
enormously across different historical times, cultural settings and political
commitments since the word was coined in ancient Greece. That said, the
diverse notions all broadly concur that governance is democratic when deci¬
sion-taking power lies with the people - a public, a ‘community of fate’ -
whom the regulations in question affect.

More specifically, most approaches to ‘rule by the people’ build in one way
or another on the following general principles. First, a public takes democra¬
tic decisions collectively, together, as a group. (To be sure, reaching collective
positions often involves delicate negotiations between majority prerogatives,
minority rights, and individual liberties.) Second, all persons qualified to
participate in democratic governance do so on an equal footing, with equiva¬
lent opportunities of involvement. Third, people engage in democratic activ¬
ities as autonomous agents: they are not coerced to participate or to take
certain positions. Fourth, democracy is conducted in an open and transparent
fashion, where everyone involved can see what decisions are taken and how.
Fifth, democracy is a responsibility as well as a right: it combines opportuni¬
ties and duties, liberties and accountabilities. In sum, then, democracy
prevails when the members of a public determine - collectively, equally,
freely, openly and responsibly - the policies that shape their joint destinies.

Needless to say, it is very difficult to realize democratic principles in prac¬
tice. Full equality, full autonomy and full transparency rarely if ever prevail.
In this sense it may well be that democracy is always pursued and never
completely achieved; yet the quest remains worthwhile, indeed vital.
Democracy is a cornerstone of human dignity and the good society. A public
should shape its own destiny, even if some might doubt the wisdom of certain
of the democratic decisions taken. A society that is not striving after demo¬
cracy tends to be a less worthy and also more dangerous place.

Of course democracy is not the only core human and social value. Its
promotion must be integrated with the pursuit of other primary concerns
such as cultural promotion, ecological care, economic efficiency, and peace.
Often democracy and these other pillars of a good society can be mutually
reinforcing, so that more of one is also more of the other. In particular, it is
not necessarily the case, as is sometimes assumed, that greater democracy
comes at a cost of reduced efficiency. For example, workers in a democratic



350 Nonnative and Policy Issues


order could through the resultant greater legitimation of and commitment to
their situation deliver higher productivity. However, where democracy
clashes with other key objectives, then trade-offs must be faced.

The manner in which people conduct democratic governance depends on
context. No single set of customs and institutions provides a formula for
democracy that is relevant and workable in all times and at all places. The
ways that principles of collective, equal, free, open, responsible decision¬
taking are enacted can vary enormously. Thus democracy as a general process
needs to be distinguished from, for instance, liberal democracy as a particu¬
lar approach to ‘rule by the people’. The liberal formula of national self-deter¬
mination through a state with periodic competitive elections to representative
institutions offers but one model of democracy and might not be suitable or
optimal in all contexts.

If practices of democracy are culturally and historically contingent, and if
(as seen in Chapter 6) globalization has brought significant shifts in the mode
of governance, then modern conceptions of democracy - centred as they have
been on the territorial national state - might have become inadequate.
Indeed, if pursued in inappropriate circumstances, conventional liberal-
democratic practices could, paradoxically, promote authoritarian condi¬
tions. An altered mode of governance like polycentrism might call for altered
practices of democracy.

Other political theorists have increasingly made similar suggestions. For
example, R. B. J. Walker has urged that ‘we may ask what democracy could
be if not rooted in a territorial community’ (1995: 323; also 1991). Anthony
McGrew has affirmed that under globalization ‘the core principles of liberal
democracy . . . are made distinctly problematic’ (1997a: 12; also 2006).
Murray Tow has noted that, if traditional democratic theory rested on a poli¬
tics of bounded places, then globalization requires a new vision and mechan¬
isms of democracy that are not organized around areal space (1997:
241-4). Responding to this need, a number of scholars have begun to explore
a variety of postterritorialist, poststatist concepts of democracy (Connolly,
1991, 1995; Falk, 1995; Held, 1995a; Gill, 1997; Dryzek, 1999; Gilbert,
1999; Thompson, 1999; Holden, 2000; Picciotto, 2001; Morrison, 2003;
Patomaki and Teivanen, 2004).

In principle the growth of multi-scalar diffuse governance and the accom¬
panying demise of sovereign statehood could be a hopeful development for
democracy. After all, sovereignty implies supreme, unqualified, comprehen¬
sive and exclusive power, whereas democracy generally emphasizes horizon-
tality, checks on power, pluralism and participation. By this logic, the retreat
of Westphalian sovereignty could encourage advances in democracy.

As noted in Chapter 1, enthusiasts have raised many hopes that globaliza¬
tion could reinvigorate democracy on new lines. By these accounts, global
communications would open countless enhanced opportunities for civic



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 351


education, public debate, and direct citizen involvement in official policy
processes. Global civil society would create unprecedented possibilities for
people to exercise voice and influence in politics. Global law would provide a
framework for democratic deliberation in place of war in international rela¬
tions.

In practice, however, experience to date has taught that increasingly poly¬
centric governance under conditions of accelerated globalization is by no
means inherently democratic. Although the contemporary growth of trans¬
planetary connections has encouraged some innovations in democratic prac¬
tices, on the whole regulatory processes in the altered political geography
have suffered from severe democratic deficits. That said, as with the negative
consequences for human security and social equality discussed in preceding
chapters, the detrimental effects in regard to democracy have not been inher¬
ent to globality. Failures of democracy have resulted not from globalization
itself, but from the prevailing ways that the trend has been handled to date.
Different approaches could be more democratic.

To elaborate this general argument, the first section below indicates how
contemporary globalization has generally weakened liberal democracy
through the state. The second section considers democratic deficits that have
resulted from widespread ignorance among citizens about globalization and
its governance. The third section examines various shortfalls in democracy
that have arisen owing to institutional failures (namely, in respect of elec¬
tions, legislative processes, judiciary mechanisms, and civil society activities).
The fourth section identifies frustrations of democratic globalization that
have flowed from structural inequalities (namely, on lines of country, class,
culture, gender, race, (dis)ability, urban/rural divisions, and age). Some
thoughts on how to reduce democratic deficits in contemporary globalization
are offered in Chapter 12.


The limits of statist liberal democracy

In the currently dominant liberal conception, democracy has existed when
society is organized around self-determining nations that hold periodic ‘free
and fair’ competitive elections of (most of) their supreme state authorities.
Other qualities of liberal democracies include the rule of law, multiple politi¬
cal parties, nonpartisan civil and military services, a scrupulous judiciary, an
independent mass media, a vibrant civil society, and civic education of all citi¬
zens. In the Westphalian international system, democracy was held to exist
when people grouped themselves as distinct nations living in discrete territor¬
ies ruled by sovereign states that are subject to popular control.

Accelerated globalization of recent decades has unfolded in tandem with a
notable growth of liberal democracy in many states where it was previously



352 Nonnative and Policy Issues


absent. A so-called ‘third wave’ of democratization has - especially in the late
1980s and early 1990s - engulfed much of Africa, Asia, Latin America and
the former Soviet bloc. In 1998 a Freedom House survey found that 117 of
the world’s 191 countries held regular competitive multiparty elections
(Karatnycky, 1999: 114). Thus in many (especially neoliberalist) eyes,
contemporary globalization has gone hand in hand with substantial demo¬
cratization.

Several connections can indeed be drawn between global relations and the
spread of liberal democracy to more states since the 1980s. For example,
global human rights campaigns and other transworld civil society associa¬
tions pressed (with some effect) for an end to many authoritarian govern¬
ments, such as communist regimes in Central and Eastern Europe and
military regimes in Latin America (Keck and Sikkink, 1998: ch 3). Global
mass media gave sympathetic publicity to a host of national democracy
movements in the late twentieth century. In the wired world of 1989, media
images of Tienanmen Square, the triumph of Solidarity in Poland, and the
breached Berlin Wall spread to spark mutually reinforcing popular uprisings
throughout Central and Eastern Europe and beyond (Boden, 1990; A. Jones,
1994). In addition, suprastate agencies have supplied various forms of
democracy support, including civil society development through EU
programmes, election monitoring through the UN, and ‘good governance’
promotion through multilateral financial institutions. Indeed, a number of
theorists and politicians have suggested that neoliberalist approaches to
economic globalization encourage a democratization of the state (cf.
Beetham, 1997).

However, these purported connections between globalization and demo¬
cratization need to be qualified on at least six important counts. First, global¬
ization has by no means constituted the sole force behind the contemporary
wave of democratization. Each transition to multiparty regimes with ‘free
and fair’ elections has drawn vital strength from locally based movements for
change. Thus, for instance, local human rights campaigns played a key role in
Argentina’s transition to democracy. Likewise, student activists and local
NGOs have made indispensable contributions to democratization in
Indonesia and Thailand. In contrast, transborder democracy support has
accomplished little in countries like a number of Central Asian republics
where local mobilization for liberal democracy has been relatively weak. In
short, global forces have normally only furthered a democratization of the
state to the extent that these inputs have fallen on fertile ground in the coun¬
try concerned.

A second criticism of the thesis that globalization has advanced democracy
through the state is that many of the newly installed liberal mechanisms have
run only skin-deep. In many cases multiparty elections have not led to
broader democratic consolidation. Some new constitutions have remained



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 353


paper instruments. Numerous ‘independent’ political parties and media
outlets have become tools of narrow personal ambition and elite privilege.
Pervasive graft has infested many court systems and government services. In
a host of purported new democracies civic education has been limited and
civil society frail. In these circumstances Fareed Zakaria has spoken of wide¬
spread ‘illiberal democracy’ in contemporary politics (Zakaria, 1997).
Thomas Carothers has similarly distinguished a large category of ‘semi¬
authoritarian’ governments with shaky democratic credentials (Carothers,
2000). William Robinson has described new democracies in the South as
‘polyarchies’ where a small group dominates the state through tightly
controlled electoral processes (Robinson, 1996b).

Indeed, to take up a third objection, it might be that liberal constructions
of democracy are not culturally appropriate in all contexts across the world.
As stressed on multiple occasions throughout this book, globalization need
not - and arguably should not - entail universalization, where one set of
meanings and ways of being is imposed across the planet, irrespective of
whether locally prevailing circumstances are conducive to the import. Thus a
western-style civil society of public-interest advocacy groups has taken
limited root in most former Soviet republics, and multiparty legislative elec¬
tions have made limited headway in most Arab states. This is not to argue for
a return to communist rule or a perpetuation of absolute monarchy, but to
consider that, in respect of democracy as well as so much else in social rela¬
tions, one size does not fit all across the contemporary world.

Fourth, some critics have maintained that liberal constructions of demo¬
cracy are inherently deficient, whatever the cultural context. From this
perspective globalization would need to promote different kinds of public
self-rule in order to be truly democratic. Democracy, according to this view,
requires more than a multiplicity of political parties, periodic elections to
representative state institutions, respect of civil rights, and nonpartisan
bureaucracies. At best, these sceptics say, liberal arrangements can achieve a
‘low-intensity democracy’ that does little to mobilize the majority and to
empower marginalized circles (Gills etal., 1993). Chronic low voter turnouts
in many countries and widespread cynicism about political parties and politi¬
cians would seem to reflect these limitations of liberal democracy (IDEA,
1997). For some social commentators, then, supplementary or alternative
means are required to move from a democracy of form to a democracy of
substance. On its own, liberal democracy cannot generate levels and types of
public awareness, participation and accountability that would constitute a
veritable democracy.

A fifth major qualification to claims that globalization has democratized
the state notes that the state, being territorially grounded, is not sufficient by
itself as an agent of democracy in a world where many social relations are
substantially supraterritorial. A statist framework of democracy cannot



354 Nonnative and Policy Issues


adequately subject transworld flows to public direction. Global democracy
needs more than a democratic state. For veritable democracy in a more global
world, ‘rule by the people’ has to extend beyond the relationship between
states and their respective national populations.

For one thing, as indicated in Chapter 6, no state can fully control its juris¬
diction’s involvement with global flows. Even the most powerful national
governments cannot by themselves effectively regulate global health prob¬
lems, global financial markets, global communications flows, global migra¬
tory movements, and global environmental changes. For example, the
States-General in The Flague is unable to exercise full democratic governance
over Netherlands-based global corporations like Philips and Royal
Dutch/Shell. Likewise, the globally circulating Japanese yen is not subject to
adequate democratic supervision through the Diet in Tokyo alone. Residents
of Mexico cannot obtain much democratic regulation of the Internet by
voting for members of their national congress. Each state rules over a limited
territory, while global processes encompass the planet, often defying country
borders. In this sense global flows can undermine even the best national
democracy.

In addition, the inadequacies of statist democracy in contemporary glob¬
alization involve ideational conditions. The growth of substate, transstate
and nonterritorial identities and solidarities of the kind described in Chapter
7 has reconfigured ‘the public’. No longer can it be assumed that the ‘demos’
in democracy is always a state-nation. Indeed, insofar as democracy through
the state is focused in the first place on education of, participation by, and
accountability to the nation, other publics may be shortchanged. If states give
precedence to a purported national interest, can they always - or even often -
provide a sufficient framework of democratic involvement for transworld
peoples like sexual minorities, communities of faith, women, and the
disabled, let alone humanity at large? ‘The people’ has many sides in the
contemporary globalizing world, and state-based democracy often proves to
be an unsatisfactory framework for self-determination by collectivities other
than state-nations.

Sixth and finally, globalization has undermined conventional frameworks
of liberal democracy since, as indicated in Chapter 6, the mode of governance
has moved from statism towards polycentrism. In the contemporary global¬
izing world, public awareness, participation and control need to be achieved
not only in relation to the state, but also in respect of the various other parts
of a multiscalar and diffuse regulatory apparatus. With polycentrism a host
of substate, transstate, suprastate and private governance mechanisms have
acquired a significant degree of autonomy from state-based democratic
processes. The resultant democratic deficits cannot be corrected through the
state alone. The rest of this chapter examines the democratic credentials of
contemporary polycentric governance and generally finds the situation sorely



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 355


wanting. The shortcomings fall under three broad headings - citizen ignor¬
ance, institutional process failures, and structural power inequalities - that
are elaborated in turn below.


Citizen ignorance

A working democracy depends on knowledgeable citizens. A public that is
unaware of its situation, and thus unmobilized, cannot pursue meaningful
self-determination. To be democratically competent, people must have access
to relevant information and an adequate understanding of the issues,
concepts, principles, policies, procedures, and evidence at hand. Public
participation in, and public control of, governance are ineffective if citizens
are ignorant. When a director of the transworld association Doctors Without
Borders (MSF) was recently asked what single development would most
boost his organization’s capacity to reform global governance of health, he
replied, ‘better public education about global affairs, so that people would
understand what we are talking about and act’ (Ooms, 2004).

Unfortunately, widespread public ignorance prevails today about globality
and its governance. Most people recognize the term ‘globalization’, but few are
clear about what, more precisely, the process entails and why it is significant.
Public awareness of the nature, scope, scale, intensity, causes and impacts of
globalization is deplorably low. Likewise, few citizens have well grasped the
polycentric character of contemporary governance. Many individuals are
ignorant of the involvement of their national and local governments in the
governance of globalization. Most people have not even heard of many of the
suprastate and private agencies that figure in the regulation of global flows.
Even activists in the politics of globalization often confuse, say, the IMF with
the World Bank. Few citizens have more than a loose intuitive sense of how
arbitrary social hierarchies of country, class, gender, race and other structures
are compromising democracy in polycentric governance of today’s world.

This democratically unacceptable ignorance has by no means resulted
from inherent stupidity on the part of citizens. Rather, the problem has been
a general lack of sufficient opportunities to become cognizant of globaliza¬
tion and its governance. As the following paragraphs indicate, these failures
of public education have been systemic across all the main sites of knowledge
production: schools, universities, mass media, civil society, and governance
agencies themselves.

Formal education

The perpetuation of general ignorance about the increasingly global charac¬
ter of contemporary society begins from an early age. School curricula have



356 Nonnative and Policy Issues


tended to include only passing and indirect coverage of global issues. True,
children are often taught about other parts of the planet and may be intro¬
duced to cultural diversity among the world’s peoples. However, schools
have rarely focused on the global domain as a social field in its own right. In
consequence, pupils normally do not consolidate notions of globality to the
extent that they develop local, country and regional frames of reference.

Many primary and secondary school systems have lacked a significant
civic education component of any kind, so that their graduates emerge with
little understanding of governance whatsoever. Where the curriculum has
included civics, the relevant courses have generally presented an obsolete
statist picture of governance, neglecting features of polycentrism such as
transgovernmental networks, suprastate agencies, and private regulatory
mechanisms. At best, with regard to global governance, certain schools have
staged a model United Nations; however, even that exercise has usually been
framed in terms of state delegations rather than the wider UN apparatus. For
the rest, attention to global governance matters vital to pupils’ future
destinies has been singularly lacking. School leavers thus assume the respon¬
sibilities of adult citizenship without basic understanding of, for instance,
global environmental conventions that shape their health or global trade
rules that govern supplies to local shops.

University curricula have also generally lagged well behind globalization
and the shift toward polycentric governance. Although higher education
courses on global aspects of society have proliferated in recent years, substan¬
tial coverage of globalization is still absent from most humanities and social
science programmes. Moreover, all too often newfangled ‘global studies’
curricula have been scarcely distinguishable from the ‘international studies’
offerings that preceded them. Hence most of today’s degree recipients - opin¬
ion leaders of the next generation - finish university with little more educa¬
tion on globality and its governance than when they started.


Mass media

Alongside formal programmes of learning at schools and universities, much
informal public education occurs through the mass media. Most citizens
obtain their day-to-day information and analysis regarding social life largely
from newspapers, magazines, radio, television and websites. Thus the mass
media significantly affect the amount and type of knowledge that people gain
about global issues. Print, audio and visual journalism have certainly helped
to raise citizen awareness of globalization and its governance; however, on
the whole the mass media’s potentials for citizen education on globalization
have remained sorely underdeveloped.

Much of the problem has lain in low levels of media attention to global¬
ization. On the whole, mainstream press and broadcasters have given scant



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 357


coverage of the global dimensions of current affairs. The ‘international’ news
often has a foreign rather than global character: that is, it addresses local and
national events in other countries. Notable exceptions to this rule have
existed, to be sure, including several business weeklies and certain satellite
television news stations that regularly highlight issues that are distinctly
global. Moreover, in certain countries like Canada and France, questions of
governing globalization have regularly occupied the headlines and editorial
pages of the principal media organs. However, on the whole news outlets
with mass audiences have tended to leave global matters in the shadows rela¬
tive to parochial stories. Large conferences on major global challenges (like
the World Summit on the Information Society, the World Parliament of
Religions, or the World Social Forum) can pass with barely a mention in most
of the media. Likewise, problems such as crises in global finance, global
epidemics of malaria and tuberculosis, and the political economy of global
corporations can be lucky to get an occasional clip in the mainstream news.
Given this dearth of reporting it is hardly surprising that most citizens remain
substantially ignorant of globalization.

Not only the quantity, but also the quality of media coverage of global
issues has often been wanting. To be sure, large press agencies and broad¬
casters have sometimes produced clear, detailed, probing and nuanced stories
concerning global affairs. Such help from the mass media can promote sound
public understanding of globalization and advance higher standards of citi¬
zen involvement in its governance. All too often, however, media treatments
of globalization have been muddled and careless, with journalists themselves
often poorly educated on global matters. Many media accounts have also
been oversimplified and sensationalized, particularly in terms of exaggerated
accounts of global threats to human security. It is sad comment on most of the
mainstream media that celebrity interventions have often been required to
boost coverage of global humanitarian issues. Regrettably, too, public
demonstrations of citizen concern about currently dominant approaches to
globalization did not gain notable column space and airtime until a minority
of protesters resorted to violent tactics.

Moreover, mass media reporting about globalization has often lacked a
sharp critical edge that would stimulate greater public debate on global poli¬
tics. Many mainstream outlets have unquestioningly underwritten prevailing
neoliberalist approaches to globalization. Indeed, much of the contemporary
mass media are big businesses, many of them globally organized, which have
profited from liberalization and privatization in the communications sector.
Often the main media organs have also maintained close ties with governing
circles, links that can further inhibit more probing investigative j ournalism on
global political economy.

Sideline voices in the alternative media have countered some of these nega¬
tive effects of much mainstream journalism. These outlets for different kinds



358 Nonnative and Policy Issues


of information and analysis about globalization include press agencies like
Prachadharm News Net in Chiang Mai and ALAINET in Ecuador as well as
radio stations like Agik Radyo in Istanbul, Mama FM in Kampala, and
Making the Links in Saskatoon. In addition, the Internet has opened up
substantial new spaces for citizen education about globalization and its gover¬
nance, including through listservs and wikis. Social movements in particular
have often used websites to obtain and spread information and analysis
concerning global affairs that is not easily available from mainstream media.

On the other hand, alternative media have generally remained small oper¬
ations that reach small and mostly self-selected audiences. These organs show
little sign of leaving the margins of global politics to become major sites of
mass education. Meanwhile the main press and broadcast outlets continue
either to ignore questions of governing globalization or to cover these issues
poorly, thereby sustaining general citizen ignorance on this subject. The
vision of some digital Utopians - where new information and communica¬
tions technologies would generate informed and active ‘netizens’ in the elec¬
tronic global democracy of a ‘virtual polis’ - is little in evidence today outside
small quarters of civil society.


Civil society

Many political activists have placed considerable hope for more democratic
globalization on the shoulders of civil society associations. This analysis
expects that citizen groups like community organizations, NGOs, faith-based
networks, and trade unions offer one of the most promising vehicles for
increased public involvement in the governance of globalization. Civil society
activities have certainly made important contributions in respect of public
understanding of global problems and policies to address them. However, as
with schools and the mass media, the civic education potential of civil society
in regard to globalization has remained underdeveloped on the whole
(Scholte, 2004b: ch 3).

Civil society groups have promoted citizen awareness about globalization
and its governance in various ways. In terms of learning events, for example,
civil society associations have sponsored countless teach-ins, lectures,
symposia, colloquia, workshops, discussion groups, roundtables, artistic
performances, and road shows. In addition, some civil society initiatives
like the RITIMO network in France have built up publicly accessible libraries
and documentation centres concerning global issues as well as many highly
informative websites. With regard to learning materials, civil society groups
like the Moscow-based Centre for the History of Globalization and world¬
wide Oxfam affiliates have collectively produced enormous amounts of
leaflets, brochures, bulletins, newsletters, magazines, books, policy briefs,
dossiers, training manuals, audio-visual productions, wall posters, comics,



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 359


paintings, sculptures and more about the governance of globalization. As for
mass media publicity, civil society groups like the Uganda Debt Network
have often sought to raise public awareness of globalization matters through
press releases, press conferences, articles in mass-circulation newspapers and
magazines, television programmes and radio broadcasts (including audience
phone-ins). In all of these ways, civil society activities of the past few decades
have made many citizens more aware of - and more confident to speak out on
- global concerns. Moreover, a number of civil society initiatives on citizen
education about globalization have made particular efforts to reach under¬
privileged circles such as poor people, peripheral countries, and women.

All told, however, civil society contributions to greater public understand¬
ing of globalization have retained modest proportions. Many citizen groups
have so concentrated their efforts on lobbying official and corporate circles
that they have neglected public education. Those civil society associations
that have given priority to this task have generally lacked the resources
required to sustain long-term programmes of large-scale citizen education on
global affairs.

Moreover, some civil society efforts have actually detracted from public
learning about globalization, for instance, with inaccurate information and
misrepresented views. Some well-intentioned activists have lacked sufficient
competence on global issues, purporting to educate others about globaliza¬
tion when they have themselves also required considerable education on these
matters. Thus, while civil society activities have made significant contribu¬
tions to counter citizen ignorance on globalization, the magnitude of these
benefits must not be exaggerated, and the effects on public understanding
have not always been positive.

Governance agency transparency

Finally, the regulatory bodies themselves are another important source of
public education regarding globalization and its governance. Here too,
however, the potentials have generally been poorly realized. Although recent
years have seen some notable improvements in the openness and trans¬
parency of many governance agencies that deal with global matters, much of
these regulatory processes remain obscured from public view.

Governors have a democratic duty to inform the governed about their
governance. Citizens should be able easily to discover what policy decisions
are taken on global issues, at what time, where, by whom, from what options,
on what grounds, with what expected results, and with what supporting
resources. Similarly, in a democracy citizens should have ready access to offi¬
cial information concerning the implementation of policies and evaluations
of their outcomes.

Elements of confidentiality in governance are of course justifiable in



360 Nonnative and Policy Issues


certain circumstances. For example, central banks and finance ministries
arguably should not divulge policy decisions at moments when release of this
information would cause major economic damage. Likewise, it is under¬
standable that military and police units do not publish their operational plans
for all to see. However, in a democracy secrecy about governance is the excep¬
tion, and openness is the norm. A special case needs to be made for withhold¬
ing information from citizens, and normally with an understanding that
relevant documents will be released into the public domain once the period of
sensitivity has passed.

To their credit, many agencies involved in the governance of globalization
have raised their public transparency in recent years. The operations of vari¬
ous suprastate, state and substate institutions concerned with globalization
are now considerably more visible to citizens than they were before the
1990s. Many governance organizations - including previously highly secret¬
ive bodies such as the IMF and the WTO - have constructed elaborate
websites and have greatly expanded their output of press releases, newslet¬
ters, reports, pamphlets, audio-visual productions, in-person presentations,
and public exhibitions. Far more official documents concerning the regula¬
tion of globalization have also become publicly available, both in hard copy
and electronically through the Internet. Many more governance bodies now
publish at least a partial staff list, often including contact details with which
citizens can reach responsible officials. This greater visibility of governance
activities better enables concerned citizens to make informed contributions to
policy debates surrounding globalization.

However, the regulation of global spaces remains far from fully transpar¬
ent. For example, as of the mid-1990s advance appointments were required
before a visiting citizen could reach the ‘public’ information centre of the
United Nations Office at Vienna. Only limited details have been publicly
disclosed about the proceedings of the IMF and World Bank Boards, G8 gath¬
erings, the BIS Board of Directors, and the OECD Council. Many state
ministries remain tight-lipped about their dealings with global governance
agencies and global corporations. Transgovernmental relations have gener¬
ally operated outside the public eye, so that most citizens are not even aware
that these policy networks exist. Likewise, the great majority of citizens are
unaware that private regulatory schemes are important for various aspects of
global communications, global finance, global investment and global trade.
With minimal publicity, most people have never heard of bodies such as the
IASB or ICANN.

Moreover, many governance agencies often fall short of effective trans¬
parency with respect to their dealings on globalization. It is one thing to
disclose information; it is something else to make that information reach - and
be comprehensible to - all people concerned. For example, many of the docu¬
ments released by governance institutions are opaque for the uninitiated.



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 361


These papers and other public statements about policies are frequently laden
with technical terms, obscure acronyms, professional jargon and other
specialized vocabulary that can both confuse and alienate an audience of lay
citizens. Often materials from suprastate bodies are not translated into all the
relevant languages. Only 10 per cent of humanity today speaks English, after
all. In many cases hard copies of documents are not readily available for
people who lack Internet access. Moreover, governance institutions have
often disclosed information to the public only after the decisions in question
have been taken, thereby limiting opportunities for citizens to influence the
policy process. In other words, ‘transparency’ has sometimes involved more
lip service than veritable openness.

In sum, all the main sources of public education in society have failed
adequately to counter citizen ignorance about globalization and its govern¬
ance. Schools, universities, the mass media, civil society associations, and
regulatory agencies themselves have neglected sufficiently to provide people
with relevant information and analytical tools for effective political mobil¬
ization. To this extent, democratic engagement with one of the most import¬
ant trends in contemporary history has been compromised.


Institutional process failures

Democracy rests not only on educated citizens, but also on participatory and
accountable processes of public decision-taking. Members of a democratic
polity must have adequate institutional mechanisms to make inputs into, and
shape, policy formulation and implementation. Moreover, in a democracy the
public must have ways to hold governors answerable for their actions (and
sometimes inactions). Many democratic deficits have arisen in contemporary
globalization because the institutional processes of governance have been
wanting in terms of citizen involvement and control. As the following discus¬
sion elaborates, these deficiencies have reigned in respect of public referenda,
legislative processes, judiciary operations, and civil society activities.


Public referenda

One way to obtain democratic input into policymaking processes is to
conduct polls of the affected public. Such popular votes can take the form of
official referenda on specific measures (e.g., whether or not to ratify a partic¬
ular treaty). Alternatively, the poll can evaluate an overall policy package
(e.g., with elections of representatives to governing councils). In addition,
sample public opinion surveys by polling agencies constitute an informal and
non-binding form of referendum. However, none of these channels has gener¬
ated much democratic participation in global politics to date.



362 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Official public referenda on specific policies have almost never figured in
the governance of globalization. For example, Switzerland is the only state in
the world that has put the question of joining global governance institutions
to a binding popular vote. In 1992 the Swiss electorate approved their state’s
membership of the Bretton Woods institutions, but the voters rejected acces¬
sion to the United Nations until 2002. The Uruguayan constitution allows for
national plebiscites on particular policies, and under this provision a popular
vote in 2004 rejected water privatization as widely promoted by multilateral
financial institutions. In 1985 the government of Nigeria invited a public
debate about a proposed structural adjustment programme, albeit without a
formal referendum. President Babangida effectively ignored the resulting
opposition by adopting the IMF/World Bank-sponsored package anyway
(Herbst and Olukoshi, 1994: 472-7). Meanwhile macro-regional and global
governance institutions have never formally polled their publics on any of
their policy proposals. Likewise, private regulatory bodies that govern
aspects of globalization have omitted this kind of public consultation.

Popular referenda can also figure in the politics of globalization more
informally in the shape of public opinion surveys by professional pollsters.
However, sampling exercises by the likes of Gallup and Latinobarometro
have rarely specifically addressed questions of globalization and its govern¬
ance (Latinobarometro, 2004). In the exceptional cases when commissioned
polls have focused their attention on global affairs, the results have received
little publicity, for example, through media reports.

In principle, citizens have significant other opportunities to raise questions
about globalization and its governance in the context of elections of repre¬
sentatives to legislative assemblies and presidential offices. Indeed, propo¬
nents of indirect democracy would argue that public referenda on specific
policies are not necessary so long as citizens have opportunities to vote in
periodic competitive elections to representative governments. In between
these plebiscites citizens are deemed to have delegated their day-to-day
participation in and control over governance to designated officeholders.

Yet questions of globalization have figured so little in parliamentary and
presidential elections that these exercises can hardly be deemed to constitute
referenda on global policies. In local and national plebiscites, for example,
the manifestos and platforms of contending political parties in most countries
have barely addressed matters of global communications, global trade, global
finance, global ecology, global health and so on. Likewise, debates and rallies
in state-based electoral campaigns across the world have rarely highlighted
the governance of globalization. Most voters cast their local and national
ballots with only secondary if any attention to global regimes. And this is not
to mention the hundreds of millions of people who live in countries without
‘free and fair’ legislative and/or presidential polls.

Meanwhile most suprastate institutions have operated without directly



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 363


elected popular representatives. The chief exception is the European Union
Parliament, which has obtained its deputies (numbering 626 as of 2004)
through universal suffrage at five-yearly intervals since 1979. That said, voter
turnouts in these elections have generally been low and have also declined
over time in a number of EU member countries. Several distinctly European
political parties have emerged in the European Parliament, including the
European People’s Party and the Party of European Socialists. However,
these organizations have been run through centralized professional offices,
with no direct input from, or accountability to, individual members and
constituency branches, as would normally happen in country-based political
parties.

Next to the EU’s representative assembly, the only other directly elected
regional body in the world is the Central American Parliament, which has
operated since 1991 with meetings in Guatemala City. Every five years voters
in the region select 22 representatives from each of six member countries. So
far no distinctly regional political parties have emerged in this assembly,
although the deputies have formed three main blocs (Parlamento
Centroamericano, 2004).

Other macro-regional parliamentary organs have not been directly
elected. Several of these bodies have drawn their members from sitting
national legislators. Examples include the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe (operating since 1949), the NATO Parliamentary
Assembly (since 1954), the Assembly of the Western European Union (since
1954), the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly (since 1992), and the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (since
1993). In 2001 the East African Community set up a small Legislative
Assembly whose 27 members are selected by (albeit in this case not from
within) the national congresses of the three member states. For the rest,
dozens of other macro-regional frameworks such as ASEAN, the GCC, and
the OAS have not had an elected permanent representative organ of any kind.

As for global governance institutions, none has direct election of its lead¬
ership. There is at present no prospect of UN People’s Council or a WTO
Parliament, although some reformers have urged the establishment of such
organs. After 115 years of operations the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
has failed to develop beyond a largely invisible and rather aimless talking
shop toward something of an elected global congress. Nor is anyone seriously
expecting popular selection of the IMF’s Managing Director or WHO’s
Director-General.

Indeed, it is far from clear how plebiscites for global regulatory bodies
could work in present circumstances. The technical means to conduct simul¬
taneous transplanetary ballots are currently not available, and global political
parties like the Liberal and Socialist Internationals are not equipped to pursue
intercontinental electoral campaigns. Moreover, at a deeper philosophical



364 Nonnative and Policy Issues


level no consensus is in sight on a formula for representation in global parlia¬
ments. For example, would the constituencies in such bodies relate to countries,
to regions or to nonterritorial configurations like functional groups, races or
religions? Would global plebiscites operate on the principle of one person one
vote, or would some weighted scheme be advisable that increases the relative
voice of small country populations and/or minority peoples? Indeed, would an
electoral model derived from modern western experience be appropriate for a
global context that is marked by far-reaching cultural diversity?

Finally, it goes without saying that the various private regulatory mechan¬
isms in contemporary governance of globalization have operated without
public polls of any kind. Bodies like the Derivatives Policy Group and the
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) have no basis in popular referenda, formal
or informal. Agencies such as the World Federation of Exchanges (for stock
and bond markets) and the Business Council of the World Tourism
Organization have lacked any systematic procedures of public consultation.
Nor have private governance institutions, as private bodies, had publicly
elected assemblies. The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) is exceptional in
having chambers to represent different stakeholders (business, environmen¬
talists, indigenous peoples, labour), although the people involved have been
largely self-appointed.


Legislation

It might be hoped that, once elected, representative legislative institutions
would exercise democratic oversight of the governance of globalization.
Unfortunately, however, the overall record in this regard has to date been
very poor. Certain national parliaments and certain individual parliamentar¬
ians have monitored certain aspects of the regulation of global relations. Yet
on the whole legislative assemblies have abdicated their duties of democratic
oversight in this area.

To begin with the local sphere, few municipal or provincial councils have
attended extensively to global affairs. To be sure, devolution of policy compe¬
tences to substate authorities (as described in Chapter 6) could in principle
substantially enhance democratic governance of globalization. After all, the
growth of electronic communications notwithstanding, many citizens still
find local government more immediate and accessible, given the smaller scale
of the operations and the closer proximity of the offices for face-to-face
contacts. Some elected substate authorities have indeed given substantial
priority to global matters, for example, by implementing global environment¬
al agreements in their localities or by assuring that global investments within
their jurisdiction conform to democratically expressed local priorities. In
addition, municipal governments in London, Paris and Porto Alegre have
since 2001 given considerable support to the deliberative democracy of the



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 365


European and World Social Forums. However, on the whole the contempor¬
ary trend of devolution from country to provincial and district governments
has not yielded greater democratic legislation with respect to globalization.

National parliaments have in general performed little better in providing
legislative oversight of contemporary globalization. Most national represent¬
ative assemblies have rarely debated global affairs (as distinct from foreign
policies towards other states). For instance, hardly any state legislatures,
anywhere in the world, carefully scrutinized the Uruguay Round agreements.
Although a number of national constitutions require that the legislature rati¬
fies treaties, much regulation of global domains today does not come in treaty
form and thereby escapes the need for parliamentary approval.
Governments, suprastate bodies and private regulatory bodies take countless
important decisions on global questions without consulting the representa¬
tive national assembly. Indeed, legislators are sometimes not even informed
of their government’s actions on global issues. In some cases parliamentari¬
ans have experienced just as much difficulty as ordinary citizens to obtain key
official documents on global subjects. Few parliamentarians have brought
personal expertise on global issues to their job. In most cases these politicians
have also lacked adequate professional researchers and advisers to support
them with global questions.

To be sure, some important instances of increased legislative activism
concerning globalization have arisen in recent years. For example,
Parliamentarians for Global Action, with over 1,300 members from 110
national parliaments as of 2004, has worked closely with a number of UN
agencies since the late 1970s. The Global Fegislators Organization for a
Balanced Environment (GFOBE), founded in 1989, now brings together
sitting representatives in more than a hundred national parliaments to
enhance legislators’ awareness of global ecological issues and policies. Most
Northern parliaments now have one or more committees that monitor their
government’s participation in the Bretton Woods institutions, albeit that few
of these legislatures have passed laws or motions on these agencies (Halifax
Initiative, 2004: 43-6). A major exception on this point is the US Congress,
which has since the early 1980s periodically held extensive debates about -
and placed multiple conditions upon - increased funding for the IMF and the
World Bank. In addition, since 2000 a Parliamentary Network on the World
Bank has brought together national legislators from around 50 countries
with the aim to promote greater transparency and accountability of that insti¬
tution and global development assistance more generally. Efforts since 2003
to create a similar Parliamentary Conference on the WTO have thus far made
less progress. Taken in sum, then, national assemblies have had a thin record
of overseeing global governance agencies. Moreover, those legislatures that
have occasionally debated global problems have not necessarily exercised
much influence on what their government has gone on actually to do.



366 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Potentials for macro-regional assemblies to exercise legislative oversight
of the governance of globalization remain limited so long as such bodies are
lacking in number and influence. Even the furthest developed regional repre¬
sentative body, the European Parliament, is to this day unable to initiate legis¬
lation or to block the rule-making directives of the (appointed) European
Commission. That said, the European Parliament has had globalization
prominently on its agenda, particularly through scrutiny of EU involvement
in the WTO (Europarl, 2004).

Finally, as noted earlier, no global governance agency has a democratically
representative and accountable legislative arm. In sum, then, nowhere in
local, national, regional or global regulatory institutions has there been
adequate legislative oversight of the governance of globalization. Rules to
govern transplanetary connections have proliferated with little involvement
from popularly elected assemblies. Indirect representative democracy is not
working in contemporary global politics.


Judiciary processes

Democratic regulation of globalization has operated little better on the judi¬
ciary side of governance. In a working modern democracy, citizens are able to
turn to non-partisan courts or other assessment mechanisms to adjudicate on
claims that authorities have caused harm. However, such avenues are gener¬
ally not (or only poorly) available in the governance of global issues.

In terms of courts, citizens normally cannot take grievances regarding
global affairs to their national and local tribunals. True, state authorities can
be brought before their own country’s judiciary to answer for alleged wrongs
committed on global policy matters within the territorial jurisdiction of that
state. However, such cases are rarely pursued and would moreover be mean¬
ingless in the various countries that lack an effective non-partisan judiciary
system in the first place. For the rest, national and local courts most of the
time cannot pronounce on the activities of the state outside its territory or on
the activities of suprastate authorities. Hence, for example, citizens of Nepal
or Peru cannot call ICANN or the IMF to account in their respective national
courts.

True, suprastate courts that cover larger jurisdictions exist for several
macro-regional governance institutions. Examples include the European
Court of Justice for the EU. Regional human rights regimes in Africa, the
Americas, Asia and Europe also include a judiciary mechanism of some kind,
whether a court or an investigative commission. However, these macro-
regional judicial arrangements are in general not well developed and little
known. Nor can regional mechanisms be used to try global actors for
transworld actions any more than national judiciaries can.

Global courts are for the most part absent or unavailable for direct citizen



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 367


petitions concerning the governance of globalization. Thus the International
Court of Justice in The Hague only considers cases brought by states, not by
individuals. The same holds true for the Dispute Settlement Mechanism at the
WTO; citizens with a grievance about trade policy must find a state to spon¬
sor their case. Advocates can alert the UN Commission on Human Rights to
violations, but the findings of its committees have no binding effect.

True, where global courts are absent other possible official avenues for
redress on global policy matters include public inspections, independent eval¬
uations, and investigations by ombudspersons. In this vein the World Bank in
the early 1990s acquired an Operations Evaluation Department and an
Inspection Panel. Similarly, the IMF has since 1997 arranged several external
reviews of certain of its policies. However, the scale of these accountability
exercises has remained modest, and the resultant recommendations have
generally been tame. Meanwhile, the BIS, the OECD, UN agencies, and the
WTO lack even such limited policy review mechanisms. Likewise, private
institutions in the governance of globalization such as the IASB and the GRI
have no systems of public accountability that come into play if and when their
regulatory activities cause harm. More is therefore needed in the way of open,
outside, independent, published assessments of the performance of global
governance bodies.

Civil society involvement

What, then, of civil society activity, through which citizens themselves can
engage with policymaking processes rather than delegate their involvement
to elected representatives and judicial bodies? As noted in Chapter 6, count¬
less business forums, community organizations, faith-based groups, labour
unions and NGOs have become increasingly involved in the politics of glob¬
alization. Many such associations have encouraged citizen participation in
policymaking on global issues: both from the inside (through direct inter¬
actions with official circles); and from the outside (through public meetings,
marches and the like). On the whole, however, the scale and impact of such
activism has remained modest. Moreover, civil society groups have some¬
times fallen short of democratic standards of participation and accountabil¬
ity in their own practices.

In terms of direct civil society engagement with official circles, many
governance agencies concerned with the regulation of globalization have in
recent decades created and expanded mechanisms for consultations with citi¬
zen groups. For instance, multiple suprastate institutions and state
ministries dealing with global issues have established specific bureaux and
appointed designated officials to handle relations with civil society groups.
Thus most of the more than 70 World Bank missions across the planet now
include a civil society liaison officer on their staff. In addition, a number of



368 Nonnative and Policy Issues


suprastate and state agencies have issued guidelines for staff interactions with
civil society organizations (cf. ADB, 1999; World Bank, 2000; UNDP, 2002;
IMF, 2003b). Civil society consultation has been formally built into a number
of global policymaking processes. Prominent examples include the opera¬
tions of the UN Commission for Sustainable Development and the prepara¬
tion of Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) for the Bretton Woods
institutions. In addition, accredited civil society organizations have partici¬
pated in many global governance convocations, including the annual meet¬
ings of multilateral financial institutions, WTO Ministerial Conferences, and
a host of UN gatherings. Some civil society actors have even accepted invita¬
tions to join state delegations to such events, thereby gaining access to the
more restricted zones of the meetings. Civil society associations have also
injected citizen voices into policy processes on global issues by sitting on offi¬
cial committees, giving testimony at parliamentary hearings, submitting posi¬
tion papers, and lobbying authorities. Occasionally officials have also
attended civil society events and engaged with citizen activists on the latter’s
own ground.

Yet the democratic consequence of civil society interactions with govern¬
ance institutions must not be exaggerated. Only relatively small numbers of
civil society organizations have acquired the competences and the connections
to deal effectively with official agencies on transworld issues. Some global
governance bodies (like the BIS and the OECD) have thus far done almost
nothing to develop procedures of civil society consultation. Among macro-
regional agencies, MERCOSUR is exceptional in having a formally institu¬
tionalized mechanism for civil society inputs, namely its Socioeconomic
Advisory Forum. Civil society groups have also generally been locked out of
G8 meetings and other transstate networks. ICANN is rare among private
regulatory agencies in having arrangements for civil society engagement. Nor
is the existence of formal consultative mechanisms enough, as many officials
have treated civil society involvement with lip service or even undisguised
hostility. All in all, then, civil society access to and engagement of official
circles regarding global policymaking could be vastly improved.

Other civil society participation in global policy processes has occurred
outside direct exchanges with official circles. After all, rulers often take
account of activities where they are not present. For example, civil society
associations have arranged countless public meetings where citizens can
express concerns and make proposals regarding globalization. Many such
gatherings have convened in the quiet of offices, conference halls, and
exchanges over the Internet. Other meetings have taken the form of noisy
rallies, marches and occupations. Civil society groups have also promoted
public participation in the politics of globalization with petitions, letter
campaigns, and boycotts on various issues. In addition, certain civil society
associations have promoted more artistic means of public involvement in



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 369


policy processes. This approach has opened opportunities for citizens who
engage in politics more comfortably through dance, drawing, fashion,
poetry, sculpture, song and theatre than through conversing and marching.
All of these modes of participation have been actively nurtured in the World
Social Forum process of globalization critiques since 2001 (Teivanen, 2002;
Fisher and Ponniah, 2003; Sen etal., 2004).

On other occasions civil society groups have worked to bring greater
public accountability into global politics. Numerous civil society bodies have
performed a watchdog role to check to see that authorities comply with their
public declarations, national statutes, and international commitments in
respect of global issues. In addition, countless studies undertaken by civil
society organizations have documented the consequences of various policies
regarding globalization. Some of these investigations have exposed error,
incompetence, corruption and harm. Civil society associations have also
provided channels through which citizens can seek correction of mistakes in
the governance of globalization. In this regard civil society groups have
pressed to have rules changed, officials replaced, institutions reconstructed,
and reparations paid. To this end, civil society organizations have taken
grievances about policies related to globalization to auditors, ombudsper¬
sons, parliaments, courts and the mass media. In addition, certain activists
have staged symbolic ‘trials’ with informal ‘tribunals’ as a way to call author¬
ities to task.

Again, however, the scale of these civil society initiatives on global matters
must not be overplayed. Only a small proportion of the world’s population
has thus far participated in the sorts of citizen mobilizations just described. In
most cases civil society organizations active on global issues have a small
membership or (in the case of many NGOs) have no membership at all. Even
when individuals have been members of a globally oriented civil society
group, their involvement has often not extended beyond the payment of a
subscription. Larger publics have tended to rally behind a civil society
campaign only on a short-term and ad hoc basis, for example, in response to
calls for humanitarian aid or debt relief. For the rest, global civil society has
mostly been the preserve of relatively small numbers of full-time professional
activists. Substantial parts of the world (like the Middle East and countries of
the former Soviet Union) have had little inputs to policies on globalization
from civil society associations. Hence much of the promise of civil society as
an engine of transplanetary participatory politics is as yet unproven.

Moreover, civil society associations involved in global policy processes
have often fallen short on democratic credentials in their own behaviour
(Edwards, 2000; Scholte, 2004a; 2004b: ch 5). For example, although some
civil society groups have provided inspirational examples of non-hierarchi-
cal, non-authoritarian, non-violent, highly participatory politics, others have
been run with top-down managerial authoritarianism that stifles internal



370 Nonnative and Policy Issues


dissent. Many civil society bodies have failed to consult their constituents in
a rigorous fashion. Some advocates who have claimed to speak for the grass¬
roots have actually rarely ventured into the field. On the contrary, a number
of the jet-setting staff have lost touch with their notional beneficiaries as they
fly from one global conference to the next. Many civil society groups engaged
in global politics have not held regular, independently monitored elections of
their officers. Nor have these associations usually conducted and published
independent external evaluations of their activities. Various civil society
bodies concerned with globalization have not been public-interest organiza¬
tions, but fronts (either openly or secretly) for governments, political parties,
corporations, foundations, families or powerful individuals. Even civil soci¬
ety associations with considerable autonomy have sometimes lacked trans¬
parency about who they are, what objectives they pursue, where their funds
originate, how they reach their policy positions, etc. Indeed, groups in ‘uncivil
society’ such as neofascist and terrorist associations have deliberately
subverted democratic practices.

As civil society organizations in global politics have matured, many of
their leaders have become more alert to - and more determined to address -
challenges regarding their own democratic practice (Brown et al., 2001;
Edwards, 2004). Critical voices in citizen movements have demanded more
participation, transparency and accountability within their own ranks. As
one democracy advocate in Uganda has put the matter, ‘When you point a
finger you need to do it with a clean hand’ (Arituwa, 2003). However, far too
many activists continue to hold the complacent view that civil society is inher¬
ently democratic.

Taking the above institutional questions in sum, shortfalls in effective
referenda, legislative oversight, judiciary evaluation, and civil society activity
have left policymaking processes for governing globalization with screaming
democratic deficits. Local and national regulatory agencies have largely
neglected global issues. Apart from the EU, few macro-regional governance
arrangements have put self-democratization on their agenda. Transworld
bodies like UN agencies and the Bretton Woods organizations have readily
preached democracy to states, but have inadequately applied the strictures to
their own workings. Indeed, to date global law has not articulated a principle
of global democracy. Private mechanisms show some of the weakest demo¬
cratic credentials of all, incorporating few if any mechanisms for public input
and public control.

In a word, then, technocracy has won over democracy in the governance of
globalization to date. Regulation of global affairs has mostly rested with
bureaucracies that are largely insulated from public inputs and public
controls. Some official circles have not regarded this ‘depoliticization’ of
governance as a problem, presenting themselves as objective experts who
operate most efficiently without ill-informed public interference. However,



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 371


even the most dedicated technocrat ought to concede that purported trade¬
offs between efficiency and democracy in current governance of globalization
have gone much too far one way.


Structural inequalities

As stressed at the start of this chapter, democracy is a three-faceted dynamic
involving circumstances of education (citizen awareness and mobilization),
institutional process (public participation and accountability), and social
structure (equal opportunity of involvement for everyone concerned). All
three aspects must be satisfied in order to realize veritable democracy. Thus it
is not enough to overcome citizen ignorance and procedural shortcomings if
governance is infused with structural hierarchies of the sort described in
Chapter 10. To the extent that globalization systematically marginalizes
certain groups, regulation tends to entail ‘rule by some people’ rather than by
the public as a whole.

Indeed, given that individual, institutional and structural conditions are
closely interconnected and mutually determining, the educational and proce¬
dural criteria of democracy cannot be fulfilled in the absence of social equal¬
ity. That is, hierarchies on lines of country, class, gender, race and more are
normally reflected in, and reinforced by, uneven access to education.
Subordinated groups tend to suffer more from inadequate information about
and limited analysis of globalization. Likewise, structural inequalities tend to
be manifested in, and reproduced by, institutional mechanisms. Hence under¬
privileged circles usually have less access to plebiscites, legislators, judiciary
agencies, and civil society activities.

Social inequalities present a major barrier to full democracy. As seen in the
preceding chapter, globalization has far from eliminated arbitrary hierarchies
of opportunity in the twenty-first century. On the contrary, under currently
prevailing policy directions the growth of transplanetary connections has
often sustained and even exacerbated structural inequalities. As the following
paragraphs indicate, these stratifications of countries, classes, cultures and
more have made contemporary global politics deeply undemocratic.


Country inequality

As noted in Chapter 10, hierarchies between countries constitute one of the
principal axes of dominance and subordination in contemporary globaliza¬
tion. When it comes to governance, this inequality between countries has
been reflected in an inequality between states (i.e., national governments).
Democracy has therefore been structurally failing in respect of globalization
partly because governments (and by extension their citizens) of subordinated



372 Nonnative and Policy Issues


countries have generally had far less opportunity for involvement and influ¬
ence in regulatory processes than governments (and by extension their citi¬
zens) of dominant countries.

Owing to these inequalities, states in North America and Western Europe
have had disproportionately greater say in the governance of global affairs
than governments elsewhere. Regional, national and local authorities in the
North have, structurally, had more resources and power in global regulation
than their counterparts in the South. Also in conformity with the
North-South hierarchy, most private mechanisms in the governance of glob¬
alization have operated from the dominant countries.

Among the major states, too, one government has been more equal than
others in contemporary globalization. Indeed, some have characterized the
dominance of the USA in global politics as ‘unipolar’ and ‘hegemonic’.
Washington has often used its advantages of resources and power heavily to
shape the rules of global relations, sometimes blatantly ignoring what the
majority of humanity might feel and want. Indeed, some have wondered why
only 6 per cent of the world’s population has the opportunity to elect the
President of the United States, when many White House decisions (e.g., on
climate change and nuclear proliferation) have profound transplanetary
effects. Even if the US government had impeccable democratic credentials
towards its own citizens - and it is far from clear that it does - this one state
has no democratic grounds to speak for billions of people across the rest of
the globe.

Glaring undemocracy of state inequality has also arisen when Northern
governments have grouped together in the governance of global affairs. As
discussed in Chapter 6, the G8 is a major force of global regulation, but it has
offered seats to only a handful of powerful states, whose collective popula¬
tion amounts to a small minority of humanity. Likewise, the G10 in global
financial governance has excluded most of the world’s states from member¬
ship. Governments in the South have formed several coalitions of their own,
including the G77 and the G24; however, these Southern bodies have exer¬
cised no notable influence next to the G8. The creation of the G20 in 1999
was meant to incorporate some governments of so-called ‘emerging markets’
in the highest councils of global governance, but this initiative has still
excluded most states of the world, including the poorest, and has so far
remained a sideshow next to the G8.

Inequality of countries has also marked formal multilateral agencies.
Apart from UNEP, with its main offices in Nairobi, all UN bodies have had
headquarters located in the North. In addition, dominant states have main¬
tained far larger and more professionally qualified delegations at the UN than
subordinate states. An aristocracy of five states has held the arbitrary privi¬
lege of permanent membership and veto power in the UN’s apex organ, the
Security Council. The more inclusive UN General Assembly works on the




Globalization and (Un)Democracy 373


principle of one state one vote, albeit regardless of the country’s population.
As a result China and Vanuatu formally speaking have equal voice, even
though the former counts over 6,000 times more inhabitants than the latter.
The past three decades have seen innumerable proposals for more democrat¬
ically legitimate forms and formulas of representation at the UN, but none of
these ideas has got beyond a commission report.

The WTO has likewise operated on the basis of one vote per member state.
However, all parties understand that the core global trade negotiations occur
between the USA and the EU. Indeed, nearly a third of WTO member govern¬
ments have lacked the resources to maintain a permanent delegation in
Geneva to monitor and intervene in day-to-day operations of the institution.
Meanwhile most states of the South and the East have had no representation
whatsoever in decision-taking at the OECD, even though many of the organ¬
ization’s recommendations and agreements have global implications.

The hierarchy of states has if anything been more blatant in governance
institutions for global finance. At the IMF, governments of the G7 countries
currently control 45 per cent of votes on the Executive Board, while 44 states
in Africa between them hold less than 5 per cent (IMF, 2003a: 143-6). Several
decades of cogent critiques of weighted voting arrangements in multilateral
financial institutions have thus far brought no significant reform (Buira,
2003). Moreover, convention has had it that a West European is always
Managing Director of the IMF, while a citizen of the USA is always President
of the World Bank, where a similarly skewed allocation of votes has
prevailed. Matters have improved somewhat at the BIS, where over 30 states
of the South and the East have in recent years become members. The BIS has
also lately opened representative offices in Hong Kong and Mexico City.
However, the main BIS operations remain centred in Basle, and the BIS staff
- like that of other global governance agencies - continues to come over¬
whelmingly from the North. Meanwhile, the IASB has developed global
accounting standards with no voice from the South, even though these rules
have some of their greatest (and relatively most costly) impacts in those coun¬
tries.

Structural inequality of countries in the governance of globalization has
also extended to civil society activities. On the whole, the strongest citizen
groups working on global issues have been based in North America and
Western Europe. Of course, many civil society associations in Africa, Asia,
the Caribbean, Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Pacific have made
notable contributions to the politics of globalization. However, even the best-
resourced civil society actors in the South have usually not matched North-
based academic, business, labour, NGO, professional and religious bodies.
Northern elements have also generally held dominant positions in transworld
civil society organizations like the ICFTU and the WWF. In consequence,
Southern civil society associations have often adopted Northern agendas and



374 Nonnative and Policy Issues


activities, also when the issues concerned are not the highest priorities for the
Southern ‘partners’. In this respect, harsher critics have dismissed so-called
‘global civil society’ as a neocolonial affair.

Across regulatory agencies and civil society alike, it is clear that the
inequality of countries has profoundly violated democratic principles in
contemporary governance of globalization. People rightly protest when some
regions inside a country are marginalized in the governance of a national soci¬
ety. Likewise, it cannot be democratically acceptable that most of humanity
is subordinated in the regulation of transplanetary affairs simply because
people happen to live on one plot of the earth’s surface rather than another.


Class inequality

Next to hierarchies among states, class inequalities of the sort described in
Chapter 10 have placed other major structural impediments in the way of
democratic governance of global relations. That is, certain socioeconomic
circles (ranging across the South as well as the North) have held arbitrary
entrenched advantages over others in the regulation of global communica¬
tions, ecology, finance, health, migration, money, trade and violence. It is
democratically indefensible when financiers, industrialists, professionals,
and people with inherited wealth have more chances to shape the governance
of globalization than the majority of their fellow citizens.

Some commentators, normally of a neoliberalist persuasion, have champi¬
oned the purportedly democratizing effects of global ‘free’ markets. In this
conception, rule by the people is greatly advanced through the growth of
consumer and shareholder choice. Here citizens vote with their pocketbooks
and savings (rather than their ballots) for producers (rather than governors)
that provide the highest returns (rather than the greatest human betterment)
in a global market (rather than a territorial state). In this reconstruction of
democracy, sovereignty is purportedly relocated from the state authority to
the market player. As the cliche would have it, ‘the customer is king’. Whereas
state-based democracy focuses on citizen rights and responsibilities to maxi¬
mize social justice, this market-based democracy concentrates on product
quality and rates of return to maximize collective human happiness. Even the
state is ‘sold’ to the public as an entertainment commodity through lotteries,
game-show elections, war performances, and other mass media spectacles.

To be sure, consumer and shareholder power are ways to express collective
will to positive ends. For example, citizens acting through consumer boycotts
and ethical investment campaigns put considerable pressure for change on the
apartheid regime in South Africa. Yet even such well-intentioned politics have
a strong class bias. After all, people need assets in order to make choices and
demand accountability through market transactions. Only a minority of the
world’s population has significant opportunities to own shares. The main



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 375


shareholders with substantial clout have been large investment trusts, pension
funds and insurance companies who usually have little contact with the every¬
day lives of the general population. Meanwhile consumer movements (usually
poorly resourced) face major challenges to mobilize large publics in political
campaigns. As a result, would-be market democracy invariably translates into
disproportionate power for propertied classes.

Class dominance in contemporary globalization has also extended to
formal regulatory regimes. Governance agencies have often been more
concerned about business interests and investor confidence than other sides
of public opinion. Indeed, many states have acted to reduce the capacities of
organized labour to promote worker interests in contemporary globalization.
Likewise, the WTO process has included companies more than consumers.
Multilateral financial institutions have generally handled global debt prob¬
lems in ways that protect creditors more than poor people. ICANN rules have
arguably given higher priority to securing Internet revenues for investors than
to expanding Internet access for ordinary people.

In these circumstances, some critics have denounced current regulation of
global affairs as ‘corporate rule’, where ‘rule by the people’ has become rule
by businesspeople. As noted in Chapter 5, relatively small numbers of large
transborder enterprises have come to dominate most sectors of today’s global
economy. This concentration of resources and power can, if unchecked, read¬
ily undermine democracy. Certainly, public-sector regulation has
constrained transborder companies to some extent: mainly through local and
country governments; and occasionally also through certain macro-regional
and transworld measures. In addition, CSR schemes have imposed some self-
restraints on global business. Certain large corporations have also undergone
significant decentralization, adopting ‘federal’ structures in which lower
levels of management have acquired greater autonomy from the executive
board (Handy, 1992). However, it is questionable whether such external and
internal constraints on corporate power have been sufficiently strong to
ensure that global firms respect the general will, particularly in those parts of
the world where states and civil societies are weak.

Class hierarchies are also reflected and reinforced in the day-to-day oper¬
ations of governance institutions. In countries of the North and the South
alike, large majorities of elected officeholders and leading bureaucrats
emanate from advantaged classes, who also dominate global and regional
civil services. This managerial class moves in fairly closed social networks,
attending the same exclusive schools and universities, joining the same
professional associations and recreational clubs, etc. People of means also
have greater opportunities to learn English as the predominant language of
regulating globalization. Even the offices of the agencies that govern trans¬
planetary relations are normally located in neighbourhoods more frequented
by privileged socioeconomic circles.



376 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Civil society activity in respect of globalization, too, has disproportion¬
ately involved university-educated, computer-literate, propertied persons.
Elite circles have generally dominated those elements of global civil society
(such as business forums and think tanks) that have the largest resources and
the highest access to governance circles. Many NGOs, too, have drawn most
of their personnel and members from elite quarters. Indeed, NGO jobs can be
highly coveted in poor countries, where a small privileged layer of the popu¬
lation has often obtained the largest share of NGO funds. Meanwhile human¬
ity’s underclasses like fisherfolk, peasants, low-paid workers, and slum
dwellers have generally lacked the funds, language fluency (or translation
facilities), and organizational capacities required for effective participation in
global civil society. For example, costs of travel mean that peasant organizers
from Brazil and India rarely meet face to face. On the few occasions that they
do, long chains of translation are required from Portuguese to Spanish to
English and finally to the local Indian language - and then back again
(Oliveira, 2004). In short, although many contemporary civil society associ¬
ations talk of involving ‘the base’, ‘the grassroots’, ‘popular organizations’
and ‘local communities’, actual opportunities for underclasses to participate
in these activities have often been severely limited.


Cultural inequality

Structural inequalities in the governance of global relations go beyond
country and class to arbitrarily imposed hierarchies of culture as well.
Regulatory frameworks for global issues have operated overwhelmingly
on western-modern lines. The rules of the game have conformed to the
norms of the dominant civilization, including its dictates of secularist,
anthropocentrist, instrumentalist, techno-scientist rationalism. The trim¬
mings have also shown a decidedly western character, with office blocks,
business suits and briefcases. Non-western, non-modern ways of being
and believing have had little say over the agenda and little play in the
policy processes of governing globalization. Regulators working within
the predominant modernist paradigm have generally neither understood
nor made time for other worldviews.

Thus, for example, across the world indigenous peoples have been rele¬
gated to the margins of global politics. Aboriginals have normally had mini¬
mal if any role in making regulations for the global companies and the global
ecological developments that affect their homelands. Although indigenous
peoples have since the 1970s gained some hearing before certain UN commis¬
sions, they have never had a vote in the organization. Meanwhile their own
‘multilateral institutions’ like the ICC and the UNPO have remained power¬
less next to the likes of the G8 and the World Bank.

Likewise, established governance channels have offered followers of



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 377


non-western religions little opportunity to argue the case for, say, a global
economy run on Islamic principles, or global conflict resolution pursued on
Sikh lines, or global ecological governance developed on Buddhist tenets.
Modern bureaucratism in the regulation of globalization has left little room
for spirituality and appeals to transcendent forces, even from Christians and
Jews. Adherents of many faiths have held positions in the governance of
global affairs, but always on the implicit if not explicit understanding that
they do not invoke their religious beliefs at the office.

Cultural issues surrounding language have also created significant hierar¬
chies in the regulation of globalization. The dominance of western languages,
particularly English, has severely disadvantaged the large majority of human¬
ity that does not speak this language. For example, many trade negotiators
from Francophone Africa have struggled to follow - let alone intervene in -
the English-based WTO process. Moreover, it is often hard for ideas and
principles that are not easily translated into English to get a hearing in global
forums.

Cultural hierarchies have also marked much civil society activity on glob¬
alization. Groups like the Muslim Brothers in Egypt and the Buddhist-
inspired Spiritual Education Movement in Thailand are exceptions that
demonstrate the rule. Indigenous peoples have also had only marginal
involvement in civil society activities concerning global issues. Their own
associations like the Assembly of First Nations in Canada or the
Coordination of Indigenous Peoples Organizations of Brazil (COIAB) have
put little emphasis on questions of globalization. Other civil society groups
have rarely consulted aboriginals. Even the Office of the General Secretary of
UNPO in The Plague is located far from any aboriginal homeland and as of
1995 included only one staff person from the indigenous groups that the
agency purported to represent.

In short, then, current governance of globalization involves widespread
cultural subordinations. Many people who feel that the growth of transplan¬
etary connections threatens values that are precious to them look for ways to
express their concerns and protect their way of life. Yet existing governance
arrangements for global relations have provided severely limited possibilities
for cultural pluralism and intercultural negotiation. In frustration with unre¬
sponsive legal-institutional arrangements, people in subordinated cultural
circles can be driven to direct their politics into irregular channels and, in
some cases, into violence.

Gender inequality

Further hierarchies of involvement in the governance of globalization have
prevailed on gender lines. The marginalization of women can start early,
when girls in many parts of the world suffer unequal access to essential



378 Nonnative and Policy Issues


services like education and health care, thereby compromising their ability
to become full citizens in adult life. On the whole, regulation of global
affairs has followed a more masculine agenda. Issues of relatively greater
concern to women such as reproductive health or the care economy have
struggled to gain attention next to matters like arms control and intellectual
property rights.

The masculine shape of the agenda is probably closely interlinked with
male predominance in policymaking positions. Across the world, women
have figured little in the upper ranks of the state or in the leadership of
regional and global governance agencies. For example, in 2002 at the IMF 54
women constituted 15 per cent of managerial staff, while 645 women consti¬
tuted 85 per cent of support staff (IMF, 2003a: 89). Such inequalities in
personnel are significant. A critical mass of women leaders could encourage
greater gender justice, even if the individual women involved were not
outspokenly feminist.

Gender inequalities have also extended to civil society activism on
global issues. Large numbers of women have participated in citizen initia¬
tives concerning globalization, particularly in the ranks of NGOs and
social movements. In exceptional cases, like the NGO sector in Canada,
broad gender equality has also prevailed in the leadership of civil society
work on globalization. However, more often than not men have held the
reins in this sphere as well. For example, women have on the whole exer¬
cised quite limited influence in business forums, labour organizations, reli¬
gious bodies and research institutes that address global issues. Across all of
civil society, men have figured disproportionately on the boards, execu¬
tives, delegations and professional staff of organizations, while women
have provided the bulk of administrative support. Gender subordination
has meant that, structurally, women have had less access and influence in
civil society engagement of globalization issues than men with an other¬
wise similar social profile.


Other inequalities

As discussed in Chapter 10, social inequality in contemporary globalization
has extended beyond stratifications of country, class, culture and gender to
include in addition hierarchies of age, (dis)ability, race, sexual orientation,
and urban/rural location. Subordinations along these various lines have also
been reflected in, and sustained by, the governance of globalization, thereby
undermining its democratic credentials.

Much of the problem has lain in getting these inequalities discussed at all
in the regulatory sphere. For example, aside from rare events like the 2001
UN-sponsored World Conference against Racism, discriminations based on
colour have almost never got a hearing in governance of globalization.



Globalization and (Un)Democracy 379


Likewise, UNICEF is one of very few (and poorly resourced) places in supras-
tate governance that has focused on young people. No global agency at all has
existed specifically to consider problems of the elderly, disabled people, or
sexual minorities in the way that the ILO has (whatever its other defects)
highlighted labour issues.

People subordinated by age, race, rural residence or sexuality have also
tended to face extra difficulties to access the institutions that govern global¬
ization. For example, it took 57 years (until May 2002) before the first
teenagers got to address the UN General Assembly (Schafer, 2005). Another
event striking for its rarity was an initiative in 1998 by the 2B1 Foundation to
give young people aged 10-16 from across the world an opportunity to
design a digital global civilization through a Junior Summit (2B1,2004). The
main governance institutions for transplanetary problems are all located in
big cities that many poor rural people cannot reach. In addition, the officials
who regulate global affairs have predominantly urban backgrounds and are
to that extent not well equipped to understand rural issues. Meanwhile
people of colour have been severely underrepresented in the civil and military
services that have governed global politics.

Civil society, too, has tended to reproduce more than resist these social
inequalities. Important global civil society initiatives have promoted the
interests of the disabled, rural people and sexual minorities; however, these
activities have tended to operate at the margins. The relative invisibility of
people of colour in citizen campaigns on globalization has been striking, even
in countries with multiracial populations like Brazil, Canada and France (cf.
Martinez, 2000). Moreover, certain civil society groups like neo-Nazis have
been unabashedly racist. With regard to age, civil society engagement of glob¬
alization has on the whole had disproportionate inputs and leadership from
middle-aged persons. Indeed, veteran civil society professionals have
frequently regarded young people mainly as a source of numbers and/or low-
paid and voluntary labour, rather than as serious colleagues and potentially
equal contributors. Likewise, very few civil society associations have taken
specific steps to incorporate the views of children and the elderly into their
work on globalization.

In sum, various structures of dominance - by country, class, culture,
gender, race, age, (dis)ability and more - have deprived most of the world’s
people of adequate opportunities to know about, participate in, and exercise
control over the governance of global relations. Together these structural
inequalities have produced far more dominance than democracy. Arbitrary
social hierarchies have also often compromised democracy within and
through civil society; thus when civil society has given voice in governance of
globalization to ‘the people’, some parts of the demos have tended to speak
louder than others.



380 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Globalization and (un)democracy in summary

Citizen ignorance

• school and university curricula have generally prepared young people
poorly for global citizenship

• mass media coverage of globalization and its governance has generally
been wanting in both quantity and quality

• civil society efforts at public education on global issues, while laudable,
have remained modest overall

• although many agencies concerned with the regulation of globalization
have become more transparent about their activities, much of this
governance is still obscured from the public

Institutional failings (on local, national, regional and global scales)

• governance agencies have rarely put questions of global policy to public
referenda

• issues of globalization and its governance have usually figured only
marginally in elections to representative offices

• local, national and regional parliaments have exercised limited over¬
sight over the governance of globalization, while transworld agencies
have lacked a legislative arm of any kind

• judiciary processes for public accountability in the governance of glob¬
alization have been sorely underdeveloped, particularly in relation to
global institutions

• civil society associations have made modest contributions to public
participation in and public accountability of governance agencies
concerned with globalization, but the citizen groups themselves have
often suffered shortfalls in their internal democratic practices

Structural inequalities (relating to countries, classes, cultures,

genders and more)

• dominant social circles have had a disproportionate say in determining
agenda priorities in the governance of globalization

• people from subordinate groups have tended to be systematically
marginalized in policy decision-taking related to global affairs

• although some civil society initiatives have concertedly resisted struc¬
tural hierarchies in the governance of globalization, on the whole these
activities have tended to reproduce the inequalities of society at large


Conclusion

Taking in sum the educational shortcomings, institutional failings and struc¬
tural subordinations surveyed above and reviewed in the summary box,




Globalization and (Un)Democracy 381


contemporary globalization has shown very weak democratic credentials.
Emergent polycentric governance of global affairs has had low levels of
participation from and accountability to a knowledgeable public. The demos
has on the whole been uninformed and uninvolved when it comes to regulat¬
ing questions such as global climate change, global financial crises, global
militarization, or global tourism. Claude Ake and others have had ample
reason to link globalization as it has unfolded so far with ‘a politics of disem-
powerment’ (1999:182). Whereas democracy normally entails majority rule
with minority rights, governance of today’s more global world has sooner
come down to minority rule without majority rights.

Thus the regulation of growing transplanetary connectivity has been
singularly lacking in democratic legitimacy. Authority is legitimate when a
governed people acknowledge that their rulers have a right to rule over them.
Legitimacy can be derived from a number of sources besides democracy,
including charismatic leadership, technical expertise, and moral justice.
However, the shortfalls in democratic legitimacy with regard to governance
of contemporary globalization are so great that no amount of charisma, effi¬
ciency and morality can compensate.

As a result, the regulation of global relations has to date rested more on
coercion than on democratic consent. Much of this coercion has been repres¬
sive, in terms of violations of human rights, withholding of resources (aid,
loans, etc.), and armed intervention. Other coercion has taken softer and
quieter forms, particularly as people have been bought off their democratic
deprivation the consumerism discussed in Chapter 5.

However, democratic deficits in contemporary globalization have not
been wholly met with passivity and resignation. On the contrary, resistance
to disenfranchisement in the governance of global affairs has grown in recent
years. Much so-called ‘anti-globalization’ activity has been driven by anger at
the unavailability of democratic politics through official governance mecha¬
nisms. It remains to be seen whether (as is explored further in Chapter 12)
current discontent will be contained with mild reforms to policy processes, or
whether the resistance will spur a deeper reinvention of democracy in global
politics.

Either way, the key point to stress at the present juncture is that global
spaces are not inherently undemocratic. Many of the initiatives mentioned in
this chapter indicate that globalization and democratization can be comple¬
mentary. The future reinvigoration of democracy demands not a reversal of
transplanetary connectivity, but a concerted search for new concepts and
practices that can make ‘rule by the people’ work in postterritorialist, post¬
statist, postnationalist politics.



Chapter 12

(Re)constructing Future
Globalizations


Main points of this chapter
General policy strategy
Enhancing human security
Enhancing social equality
Enhancing democracy
Towards implementation
Conclusion


Main points of this chapter

• a policy strategy that combines ambitious reformism with cautious trans-
formism offers the most promising way forward in respect of contempor¬
ary globalization

• various specific initiatives (ranging from personal lifestyle changes to
global public policies) can improve the outcomes of globalization in
regard to human security, social equality and democracy

• current circumstances pose both opportunities and obstacles for imple¬
mentation of these measures


In compiling a normative assessment of contemporary globalization, the
preceding three chapters have consistently advanced a twofold general argu¬
ment. First, globalization has to date had mixed consequences for human
security, social equality and democracy - including some significant negative
repercussions. Second, the downsides have resulted not from transplanetary
connectivity as such, but from the policy orientations (mainly neoliberalist)
that have prevailed over recent decades in respect of growing global relations.

The second of these theses implies that changes in policy approaches to
globalization (in particular reorientations away from neoliberalism) could
produce greater security, equality and democracy. So political choices are
important. It is not the case, as some commentators once suggested, that
There Is No Alternative (TINA) to liberalization, deregulation, privatization,
and fiscal conservatism as the policy framework to guide increased trans¬
planetary connectivity. Rather, in the motto of many critical globalization


382





Future Globalizations 383


activists, other worlds are possible. Yes, as discussed in Chapter 4, powerful
structural forces have propelled contemporary accelerated globalization:
turns in capitalist production; the state and emergent polycentric governance;
national and nonterritorial identities; and rationalist knowledge. But this
does not mean that actors have no scope to shape, and reshape, those struc¬
tural impulses and thereby to influence the course of globalization. On the
contrary, agency matters (Bleiker, 2000). It is possible to make use of global¬
ization as well as to be used by it. More strongly, today’s policymakers, as
well as citizens at large, arguably have ethical responsibilities to handle a
more global world to better effect.

Yet what, more specifically, should those different (non-neoliberalist)
policy courses be? How can one optimally, as James Mittelman has put it,
‘rewrite the script of globalization’ (1999: 15)? It is one thing to diagnose ills
and quite another to prescribe suitable treatments. Moreover, it is one thing
to advance attractive proposals and quite another to get them implemented.
These concerns of policy formulation and political action are the subject of
this final chapter.

In elaborating strategy for more secure, more equitable and more demo¬
cratic future globalizations, the first section below distinguishes several possi¬
ble general policy courses that could be taken and then identifies and justifies
the broad approach adopted here. This strategy can be characterized as a
blend of ambitious reformism and cautious transformism. Subsequent
sections of the chapter then describe various concrete measures that could be
taken with this general orientation in order to steer globalization towards
greater human security, social equality and democracy. The final section of
the chapter considers the main challenges that face the implementation of
ambitious reformism/cautious transformism in globalization politics today.

Although this discussion promotes one kind of broad policy approach, the
chapter title deliberately refers to ‘globalizations’ in the plural. In other
words, central to the alternative orientation advocated here is an avoidance
of past tendencies to impose a single universalist blueprint on globalization,
of whatever liberalist, social-democratic, socialist, eco-centrist, theist or
other colour. A veritable Post-Washington Consensus should not be a
consensus in the sense of establishing one uniform policy framework for all;
rather, a more open future would encourage different constituencies to
pursue diverse and autonomously formulated policies towards globalization.


General policy strategy

Before considering specific policy steps to enhance human security, social
equality and democracy in future globalizations, it is as well to consider the
overall policy framework in which those concrete proposals might be



384 Nonnative and Policy Issues


couched. There is otherwise a danger that particular policy initiatives are
pursued without a strategic vision that sets main priorities and long-term
objectives. The following paragraphs first survey a spectrum of possible
general policy orientations toward globalization. A combination of ambi¬
tious reformism and cautious transformism is then identified and justified as
a preferable broad strategy. The scene is thereby set for the discussion in later
sections of particular policy measures and political challenges for their imple¬
mentation.


Broad options

As noted in Chapter 1, four main policy approaches toward globalization can
be distinguished, namely, neoliberalism, rejectionism, reformism and trans¬
formism. To be sure, this fourfold typology is overly neat. Each of the cate¬
gories encompasses a spectrum ranging from mild to uncompromising
variants. Moreover, the dividing lines between the four stylized models can
blur in practice. The simplified schema is employed here for analytical conven¬
ience rather than to provide precise pigeonholes into which every policy and
each commentator on globalization can be unambiguously slotted. The
broad distinction between neoliberalism, rejectionism, reformism and trans¬
formism is a useful way to stress that very different types of policy courses can
be pursued vis-a-vis globalization.

To recapitulate, neoliberalist approaches have prescribed four central
policy pillars for the practice of globalization: liberalization of cross-border
transactions; deregulation of market dynamics; privatization of both asset
ownership and social service provision; and tight limits on public spending.
In a word, neoliberalists have advocated market-led globalization with a
minimal role for public policy. In a neoliberalist strategy, governance agen¬
cies create an enabling environment for global market forces and then let the
private sector deliver the social good with (according to theory) maximum
efficiency.

In contrast to laissez-faire, rejectionist strategies towards globalization
seek to reverse the trend and rebuild society without transplanetary connect¬
ivity on the basis of self-sufficient local and country units. For rejectionists,
globalization is incorrigible. From this perspective a more global world
invariably entails cultural imperialism, dictatorship, ecological catastrophe,
poverty and war. Flence the only way to handle globalization is to block it.

Tike rejectionist strategies, reformist programmes oppose the neoliberalist
market-led orientation to globalization. However, instead of dismissing glob¬
alization altogether, reformist approaches advocate policy interventions by
public agencies to enhance the fruits and limit the harms of transplanetary rela¬
tions. In part, such regulatory measures are pursued through state and substate
laws and institutions, as in past social-democratic politics. In addition,



Future Globalizations 385


however, reformism when applied to contemporary large-scale globalization
also puts major store by suprastate mechanisms of macro-regional and global
public policy.

Transformist strategies share with reformist perspectives a conviction that
globalization can be reshaped in more positive directions than the neoliberal-
ist course that has dominated over the past quarter-century. However,
whereas reformists seek to make existing social structures produce better
outcomes, transformists seek better outcomes through a change of social
structures. Thus reformists would use public policy measures to achieve
greater human security, social equality and democracy through capitalism,
but transformists would transcend capitalism to realize those goals.
Similarly, reformists aim to work within the logics of polycentric governance,
established patterns of identity construction, and rationalist knowledge to
improve the results of globalization, while transformists aim to construct
altogether new modes of regulation, identity politics, and epistemology.

The difference between these four broad policy orientations can be illus¬
trated with reference to any substantive global issue. In relation to global
ecology, for example, neoliberalists suggest that ‘free market environmental¬
ism’ with ‘eco-preneurship’ by ‘enviro-capitalists’ can solve problems such as
climate change and biodiversity loss (Anderson and Leal, 1991, 1997). In
contrast, rejectionists argue that large-scale transplanetary connectivity is
inherently disastrous for ecological integrity, so that globalization must be
replaced with localization if human and other life on earth is to survive
(Hines, 2000; Monbiot, 2003). Meanwhile, reformists maintain that public
policies (including in particular global laws and institutions) can rescue the
planet from ozone depletion, deforestation, and the like (Young, 1996;
Benedick, 1998). From a more deeply critical perspective, transformists
affirm that environmental destruction is intrinsic to the logic of capital accu¬
mulation and anthropocentric techno-scientific rationalism. Hence these
radicals advocate a fundamental reconstruction of production and know¬
ledge structures - for example, in line with Thomas Berry’s ‘earth spirituality’
or Vandana Shiva’s ‘earth democracy’ - in order to achieve a viable global
ecology.

The four types of strategy also take fundamentally different approaches to
global finance. For neoliberalists, unhampered transplanetary market flows
of savings and investments greatly enhance economic growth for all. On the
neoliberalist account, periodic instability and crises are an unavoidable and
comparatively small price to pay for these gains. For rejectionists, however,
global finance entails an unacceptable loss of sovereignty and exploitation by
multinational corporations that can only be averted with a turn to closed
national financial markets and/or the creation of autonomous local monies
(Bond and Bullard, 1999; Community Currencies, 2005). For reformists,
transplanetary finance requires a fully fledged global regulatory apparatus,



386 Nonnative and Policy Issues


including a transworld central bank, in order to avoid oligopoly, limit instab¬
ility, avert crisis, achieve fair distribution of benefits, and assure democratic
control (Eatwell and Taylor, 2000). For transformists, modern capitalist
finance itself is a deeply flawed system of domination that requires decon¬
struction and transcendence (Goede, 2001; Robotti, 2003).

With regard to digital development, neoliberalists have held that global
market competition will bring advanced information and communications
technologies to all. Such a vision has underlain, for example, several WTO
agreements on telecoms and IT as well as the G8-sponsored DOT Force. In
contrast, all-out rejectionists have in Fuddite fashion refused to engage with
electronic mass media and the Internet as corrupting technologies that under¬
cut autonomy, community and morality. More optimistically, reformists
have argued that public policy interventions from substate, state and supras-
tate authorities can counter digital divides and ensure that the global infor¬
mation infrastructure reaches and benefits all (Kahin and Nesson, 1997).
Meanwhile transformists have urged people to exploit the opportunities that
digital technologies offer to create new and better modes of production,
governance, identity politics, and knowledge.

And so one could continue to distinguish contending policy strategies
towards global migration flows, global health problems, global military
operations, and other issues. Having said that, it is important not to reify the
fourfold distinction between neoliberalism, rejectionism, reformism and
transformism. In practice, policy commentators and policy measures often
blend several of these four tendencies. For example, the ‘Augmented
Washington Consensus’ initiatives described in Chapter 1 have added modest
reformist elements to the neoliberalist formula. The Vatican has advocated
reformist policies like debt relief for poor countries, while at the same time
transformist voices in the Roman Catholic Church have championed libera¬
tion theology. A number of labour unions and NGOs have straddled rejec¬
tionism, reformism and transformism in their approaches to globalization:
sometimes urging protectionism; sometimes promoting suprastate regula¬
tion; sometimes advocating social revolution.

These complexities acknowledged, policymakers and citizens at large still
face a basic choice in their attitude towards globalization between: (a)
supporting prevailing neoliberalist orthodoxy; (b) rejecting globality in all
forms; (c) pursuing a reformist programme of proactive public policy initia¬
tives; or (d) adopting a transformist strategy of deeper structural change.
Drawing on the account of causal dynamics in Chapters 4-8, the assessment
of normative challenges in Chapters 9-11, and the author’s own political
proclivities, this book suggests that a strategy that couples ambitious
reformism with cautious transformism offers the most hopeful forward
orientation for globalization in the early twenty-first century.



Future Globalizations 387


Against neoliberalism

In combining inspirations from reformism and transformism, the strategy
pursued here opts against neoliberalism. On the one hand, this decision flows
logically from the critiques of liberalist and political realist explanations in
Chapter 4. In other words, theoretical positions inform policy choices. In
addition, the strategic orientation adopted here is empirically grounded. That
is, the evidence of recent globalization does not suggest that neoliberalist poli¬
cies - even with recent injections of post-Washington Consensus reforms -
can maximize human security, social equality and democracy.

Neoliberalist policies have three main conceptual shortcomings. First,
they fail to address the deeper social forces that are at work in globalization.
Neoliberalist discourse is generally couched in loose and superficial talk of
‘technological innovation’, ‘market forces’, ‘international competition’ and
‘economic growth’. These accounts ignore the more fundamental issue of
capitalism. Yet policies toward globalization that neglect the central role of
surplus accumulation and associated tendencies of exploitation cannot hope
to achieve poverty eradication, decent work conditions, environmental
sustainability, cultural self-determination, and peace.

Second, and related to the irreparable oversight regarding capitalism,
neoliberalist policies are inherently incapable of generating maximal good
from globalization because they downplay or outright ignore issues of struc¬
tural inequality. Arbitrary and unjust hierarchies of class, country, faith,
gender, race and other social categories cannot be significantly corrected
unless combating these inequalities is made a foremost policy priority. This
neoliberalism singularly fails to do, merely promising that the benefits of
global markets will eventually ‘trickle down’ to the poor and the weak.
Indeed, neoliberalists often argue that public policies to reduce inequality will
‘distort’ markets and reduce productivity. Yet some of the most prosperous
parts of the world like Scandinavia also manifest the lowest social inequalities
as a result of proactive public policies.

A third intrinsic conceptual flaw in neoliberalist policies towards global¬
ization is their materialist orientation. The economism of neoliberalism
ignores the importance of identity, solidarity, faith, spirituality, aesthetics
and more on the ideational sides of human security, equality and democracy.
Although the delivery of adequate material welfare is essential to put global¬
ization on a durable course, the provision of physical comforts on its own
does not guarantee human dignity and the realization of human potentials.

These conceptual shortfalls of neoliberalism have fed practical failings.
Although marketist policies towards globalization have often (though not
always) promoted economic efficiency, they have also - as earlier chapters
have extensively shown - done considerable harm. Global ‘free markets’ have
frequently perpetuated or deepened ecological degradation, destitution,



388 Nonnative and Policy Issues


labour abuses, xenophobia, cultural destruction, class and country hierar¬
chies, oligopoly, democratic deficits, and other violences.

In these circumstances, neoliberalist discourse has sometimes appeared to
be an ideology of the powerful that obscures - and in this way helps to sustain
- sufferings, especially of the vulnerable. Indeed, is it accidental that neolib¬
eralist accounts of globalization have mainly emanated from dominant social
circles and countries? This observation is not meant to suggest that propo¬
nents of neoliberalism have held a conscious objective to harm large parts of
humanity. On the contrary, many committed neoliberalists have in all sincer¬
ity believed that their prescriptions advance the construction of a good soci¬
ety. Yet, however laudable the intentions of individual neoliberalists might
be, this approach to globalization has in practice mostly served the interests
of the privileged and all too often undermined the position of the weak.

A redirection of globalization away from neoliberalist policies is therefore
desirable. It is also possible. The position is not, as Francis Fukuyama claimed
at the dawn of the post-Cold War world, one of ‘the end of history’, where no
alternatives to neoliberalist orthodoxy are viable (Fukuyama, 1992). On the
contrary, substantial possibilities exist to develop visions, policy tools and
political constituencies for different courses of globalization.


Against rejectionism

That alternative course cannot and should not be one of rejectionist de-glob-
alization. As with neoliberalism, the failings of this policy strategy are both
conceptual and empirical. Rejectionist calls to undo globalization and estab¬
lish sovereign local and national orders are neither workable nor desirable.

In terms of misconceptions, rejectionists have tended to romanticize the
unglobalized past. After all, territorialist times also knew much - and in some
cases more - poverty, arbitrary social hierarchies, authoritarian governance,
warfare, ecological damage, and cultural destruction. Also contrary to rejec¬
tionist assumptions, as noted earlier in Chapter 2, the local has not in practice
always offered a cosy alternative to purportedly faceless globality.

Moreover, proponents of rejectionist policies tend to forget the benefits of
globalization that would be lost if transworld links were cut. As earlier chap¬
ters have indicated, transplanetary connectivity has encouraged many posi¬
tive developments in regard to material welfare. Also contrary to many
rejectionist claims, and as shown in Chapters 2 and 7, globalization has some¬
times helped to reinvigorate rather than undermine cultural heritages. In
addition, against another main rejectionist premise, globalization has often
promoted increased rather than decreased ecological awareness, albeit in a
context of greater environmental degradation.

In any case, rejectionism is an impracticable policy strategy. As stressed in
Chapter 4, the forces behind the current growth of transplanetary and



Future Globalizations 389


supraterritorial connectivity are too strong to eliminate the trend. The notion
that global capitalism in extractive, manufacturing, information, communi¬
cations, biotechnology, nanotechnology and care industries could be
switched off seems outside the realm of the possible in contemporary politi¬
cal economy. Likewise, it appears fanciful to think that all regulatory appar¬
atuses beyond the state could be dissolved, that all identity impulses beyond
the nation could be denied, and that all knowledge could be purged of global
consciousness. Great as the harms of neoliberalist globalization may often
have been, rejectionist pleas for de-globalization are an ostrich reaction that
fails to address the challenges in a workable fashion. It is a non-starter to
think that countries and localities of the twenty-first century can cocoon
themselves from global communications, global finance, global governance
and the like and thereby make globalization go away.

Certainly, alternative policies towards globalization could strive to
enhance local and national initiatives regarding the ways that different people
in different contexts handle transplanetary issues. Indeed, such devolutionary
steps might substantially advance a democratization of globalization.
However, this strategy involves globalization through localization (recalling
from Chapter 2 that the two are not inherently contradictory), rather than a
misguided attempt to eliminate transworld connectivity. Nor can most local
and country programmes to steer globalization be successful in isolation, in
the absence of coordination with other local and national moves elsewhere
across the planet. Rejectionist strivings to retrieve some kind of Westphalian
sovereignty are foredoomed to failure.

Even if rejectionist policies were viable, would they be desirable? It is quite
understandable that people who have felt besieged under neoliberalist glob¬
alization might defensively pursue territorialist refuge in a localism of
cultural, ecological and economic protectionism. Yet all too often rejection¬
ist sentiments have involved inward-looking parochialism. Moreover, anger
and frustration about harms of neoliberalist globalization have injected some
strains of rejectionism with violences of exclusionary nationalism, racism,
and religious fundamentalism. Against this negativism, reformist and trans-
formist strategies offer possibilities for positive globalizations on other than
neoliberalist lines.


For ambitious reformism

Whereas neoliberalist strategies of globalization are undesirable, and rejec¬
tionist programmes are in addition impracticable, reformist policies are both
more attractive and more feasible. This broadly social-democratic approach
to globalization rests on a firm understanding of the material forces behind
the process, coupled with a determination to exploit proactive policy inter¬
ventions to shape capitalist production and emergent polycentric governance



390 Nonnative and Policy Issues


to positive ends. On the negative side, however, reformism tends to under¬
estimate the power of structural inequalities, to be elitist, and to neglect
ideational aspects of globalization. Hence this book urges the adoption of an
ambitious reformism that seeks the maximum possible gains from globally
oriented social democracy and then looks to transformist inspirations to
make up for shortcomings in this approach.

As a major plus, reformist strategies towards globalization reject neoliber¬
alism’s blind faith in markets and recognize that laissez-faire can generate
harm as well as good. Indeed, reformists go beyond talk of ‘market competi¬
tion’ to call ‘global capitalism’ by its name. To alleviate sufferings and
increase opportunities under global accumulation, reformists advocate the
use of democratically determined public policies. For example, to improve
human security under globalization, reformists have called for binding envi¬
ronmental regulations, enforceable labour standards, quality public health
services, and effective arms controls. To combat social inequality, reformists
have argued for measures such as redistributive taxes, abolition of unsustain¬
able poor country debts, and concerted efforts to increase female literacy. To
reduce democratic deficits in globalization, reformists have urged steps such
as popular referenda, maximum transparency of official decision-making,
and enhanced civil society consultation in policymaking processes.

Also to their credit, reformist strategies towards increased transplanetary
connectivity recognize that - against obsolete rejectionist fixations on local
and national sovereignty - at least some of this corrective public policy needs
to operate through suprastate laws and institutions. For instance, many
reformists regard social democracy through macro-regional apparatuses as
an important means to harness globalization to humane ends. Regionalism
moreover allows policies on global issues to be adapted for the particular
priorities and cultures of different areas of the planet. In addition, reformists
see the necessity of achieving a substantial expansion of transworld govern¬
ance if progressive public policy is to be effective under more globalized
conditions. Ambitious reformists therefore promote the construction of
bodies like a global environmental organization, a global central bank, a
global competition authority, and additional - and stronger - global courts.
At the same time, reformists are acutely aware of the need to improve the
democratic credentials of macro-regional and global governance.

Reformism not only has these attractions in principle, but its prescriptions
are also viable in practice. It is technically quite possible to formulate effective
policies for publicly controlled globalization and to devise workable institu¬
tional mechanisms to administer these measures. Neoliberalists are only too
ready to dismiss attempts to harness global markets as unfeasible, and certainly
the technical challenges facing effective global environmental agreements,
global taxes and the like should not be underestimated. However, political will
also opens a way. After all, concerted efforts backed by substantial resources



Future Globalizations 391


have succeeded in attaining countless other technical breakthroughs in glob¬
alization: from nuclear weapons and the Internet to the CLS and the TRIPS
agreement. Similar levels of commitment could yield major advances in effec¬
tive global social democracy.

Indeed, the political environment for reformist policies towards globaliza¬
tion has become more auspicious in recent years. Growing constituencies -
including among some elite circles - have backed at least milder versions of
reformism. For example, the directors of the WEF have cautioned that ‘the
globalized economy must not become synonymous with “free market on the
rampage”’ (Schwab and Smadja, 1996). Unadulterated neoliberalism
persists in some quarters, but considerable support has grown for the view -
here expressed by the head of UNDP - that ‘globalization is too important to
be left as unmanaged as it is at present’ (HDR, 1999: v). Putting this point
more metaphorically, a UNICEF official has declared that globalization is a
bumpy road full of potholes, so cars need to be equipped with good shock
absorbers (Vandemoortele, 2000).

Some analysts have suggested that the recent rise of reformism in global¬
ization politics marks a recurrence of what the economic sociologist Karl
Polanyi called a ‘double movement’ (Polanyi, 1944). In this purported
systemic rhythm of market society, a movement of laissez-faire gives way to a
countermovement of resistance and regulation, as citizens and their govern¬
ments react against the undesirable social and environmental consequences
of untrammelled market capitalism. Writing in the 1940s, before the acceler¬
ated globalization of the past half-century, Polanyi described the double
movement in relation to territorial capitalism. Today a new generation of
Polanyian arguments have suggested that a civilizing countermovement
against neoliberalism could be underway in global capitalism (Mendell and
Salee, 1991: xv-xvii; Gill, 1995b; Block, 2003; Silver and Arrighi, 2003).

Such optimistic diagnoses of triumphant resistance to laissez-faire warrant
some caution, however. Yes, ultra-liberalism of the 1980s and early 1990s
thankfully did not sweep away all concerns with social justice, social rights,
social responsibility, and social regulation. Yes, there has been greater plural¬
ity of visions and more public debate about globalization since the late 1990s,
after the monochrome neoliberalist politics of the preceding fifteen years. Yet
progress on reformist paths has been limited and slow. After all, elite circles
have issued public urgings for more economically, socially and environment¬
ally responsible globalization as far back as the late 1980s. Since then an
endless stream of UN meetings and reports, IMF and World Bank initiatives,
G8 and WEF schemes, and CSR programmes have all promised a more
humane globalization. But how much concrete advance of reformism has
actually been booked between the time that UNICEF called for ‘adjustment
with a human face’ in 1987 and the advocacy by an ILO-sponsored commis¬
sion of‘a fair globalization’ in 2004 (Cornia etal., 1987-8; WCSDG, 2004)?



392 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Reflecting on this disappointing history, some would-be reformist talk
looks more like rhetoric to defuse opposition to neoliberalism than a substan¬
tial alteration of the policy framework. These politics - in the vein of an
‘Augmented Washington Consensus’ - amount to ‘neoliberalism with knobs
on’ rather than full-scale reformism, where the governance of globalization
would be based on principles of redistribution, rights and regulation. Thus,
for example, widespread discussion of a ‘new global financial architecture’ in
the wake of the crises in Asia, Russia and Latin America in the late 1990s
produced few concrete results. Even the seemingly promising Financing for
Development process, pursued through the UN since 1997, has run aground
in minor gestures. Likewise, the Doha cycle of multilateral trade negotiations
was launched in late 2001 as a ‘Development Round’, but the talks have so
far done little to re-regulate global commerce in favour of the poor.

Indeed, neoliberalists have on various occasions captured and tamed
reformist discourse. Thus, for example, international financial institutions
have repackaged ‘poverty eradication’ in lamer terms of ‘poverty reduction’.
In neoliberalist hands, the struggle for ‘transparency’ has become largely a
campaign against corruption. Rather than ‘mobilization’ of ‘civil society’,
neoliberalism with knobs on has yielded ‘consultation’ of ‘NGOs’. As one
activist has despaired, ‘global managers adopt a language that takes the
mantle of the critics and takes energy out of their movement’ (Barr, 2002).

Instead of these attenuations, the policy strategy advocated here insists on
an ambitious reformism that does not stop at social safety nets, environment¬
al impact statements, and corporate citizenship, but in addition undertakes
far-reaching public regulation and progressive redistribution of resources.
‘Thin’ reformists only invoke proactive public policy to prevent or clean up
major market damage. In contrast, ‘thick’ reformists reject the neoliberalist
emphasis on market-led globalization and shift the initiative to public policy
management. In ambitious reformism state, substate and suprastate laws and
institutions take firm hold of the steering wheel and harness forces of global¬
ization to explicit and democratically determined public measures.
Ambitious reformism looks beyond band-aids to full treatment. Fingers in
holes do not salvage a structurally flawed dyke. When facing a wide chasm (of
security, equality and democracy problems) it is unwise to take a small step.

But do even ambitious reformists take sufficiently large leaps in their
efforts to reshape globalization? Laudable though their intentions may be,
social democrats often fail to tackle structural inequalities as vigorously as a
fully egalitarian strategy would require. Ambitious reformists give ample
attention to policies of income redistribution, as well as improved access to
resources and services for underprivileged circles. However, social democrats
look for the best possible deal within capitalism, a mode of production whose
inherent logic inclines toward inequality. Radical socialists therefore criticize
reformists for failing to pursue more egalitarian post-capitalist solutions.



Future Globalizations 393


Indeed, it is perhaps telling that reformist politics tend to be elitist, accord¬
ing little role in policymaking to social movements of the oppressed them¬
selves. Under social-democratic strategies of ‘steering’ globalization, it is
progressive circles of the global managerial class that design the driving
mechanism and occupy the driving seat. The ‘democracy’ in global social
democracy tends not to extend beyond the limited mechanisms of popularly
elected representative institutions and professional civil society bodies.

In addition to dangers of elitism and excessive moderation in combating
structural inequalities, reformist strategies towards globalization tend, like
neoliberalism, to suffer from materialism. Thus social democratic policies
generally give little attention to ideational aspects of human security, to
cultural and psychological aspects of social inequality, and to the role of iden¬
tity politics and knowledge power in building or blocking democracy. Indeed,
with culturally blind self-regard many advocates of global social democracy
fail to appreciate that this policy strategy has derived largely from specific
contexts in Western Europe and North America. Reformist controls of trans¬
planetary capitalism are generally conceived on an assumption that the
Northern welfare state provides a universal formula, when global public
policy arguably needs to emanate from extended intercultural dialogue
among diverse visions.

These important shortcomings acknowledged, ambitious reformism
retains considerable potential for generating more positive future globaliza¬
tions. Much can be gained from proactive public regulation of global capital¬
ism, including concerted interventions to bring a more equitable distribution
of benefits and harms. To be sure, the reform measures described in the next
sections would not - even if completely implemented - yield immediate or
total security, equality and democracy. However, these steps offer the
prospect of substantially improved results of transplanetary relations within
a generation.

For cautious transformism

The pitfalls of reformism - including its more ambitious variants - can be
partly reduced through engagement with transformist strategies that seek
through globalization to reconstruct the primary structures of social life.
Already in the preceding paragraphs, insights from these more radical
programmes have helped to identify key limitations to reformist approaches.
In addition to providing critique, transformist visions - or at least some of
them - can also inspire positive concrete changes in the ways that global rela¬
tions are practised. That said, exuberant enthusiasts tend to overestimate
current possibilities to achieve full-scale revolutions to post-capitalist, post-
bureaucratic, post-national, post-rationalist globalizations.

In terms of positive contributions of transformist orientations, socialist



394 Nonnative and Policy Issues


inspirations regarding the mode of production can help to place the focus of
globalization politics on achieving equality, as opposed to merely reducing
inequality. Attaining a good is more than avoiding a bad: ensuring equivalent
life chances for all (as transformist socialism advocates) entails more than
eliminating gross inequities (as reformist social democracy urges). Thus
notions such as post-capitalist solidarity economics with alternative models
of work and consumption merit a serious hearing and concerted efforts at
elaboration and implementation.

Likewise, anarchist visions of alternative non-bureaucratic governance
merit serious attention in the contemplation of more progressive governance
of global relations. The promotion of decentralized, small-scale, non-hierar-
chical, non-professionalized decision-taking on transplanetary matters could
enhance the possibilities for all people to debate and shape their global
futures. As such, anarchist inspirations could make major contributions to a
democratization of globalization. This orientation, too, could help to lift the
sights of global politics to higher aspirations than competition, efficiency,
and growth alone.

In respect of identity, postmodernist inspirations could encourage moves
towards more constructive dynamics of being and belonging than traditional
forms of both communitarianism (with its tendencies towards violent other-
ing) and cosmopolitanism (with its tendencies towards cultural imperialism).
Against communitarianism, alternative modes of identity construction could
refuse binary us-them oppositions and reject the accompanying politics of
exclusion, instead recognizing and celebrating the multifaceted hybrid char¬
acter of the self and its plurality of overlapping group affiliations. Against
traditional cosmopolitanism, postmodernist identity politics could deny the
universality of any one mode of being and instead base global solidarity on a
respect of difference and mutually enhancing intercultural interchange. By
breaking down artificial divisions and exaggerated oppositions between
identities, a postmodernist approach would also undermine hierarchy and
inequality in social relations.

With regard to knowledge, too, postmodernist critiques could help to
further the trend toward more reflexive rationality and at the same time
create more space in globalization for a plurality of epistemologies. Although
rationalist knowledge has borne significant fruits, its underlying drive for
human control of nature and society has also generated profound tensions
with ecological integrity and democracy. Postmodernist promotion of more
open, plural and variable knowledges could help to improve cultural and
ecological security as well as to combat authoritarian impositions of one
mode of knowledge over others.

Many of the preceding comments are highly general and thereby point
up one of the principal reasons for advocating a cautious transformism,
namely, the generally underdeveloped formulation of these more radical



Future Globalizations 395


alternatives to neoliberalist globalization. For their part, global socialists
have not delineated specific contours of a post-capitalist mode of produc¬
tion; nor have they indicated exactly how this structure would yield more
human security, social equality and democracy. Likewise, global anarchists
and global postmodernists have not offered very precise accounts of post-
bureaucratic governance and post-rationalist knowledge. In short, these
transformist approaches have provided much more detail about what they
oppose in other strategies of globalization than about what they support as
alternative futures. The critiques are immensely helpful in revealing the
limitations of globalization-as-it-is, but protest needs to be matched by
proposal in order to realize globalization-as-it-could-be. Indeed, if insuffi¬
ciently grounded in clearly formulated visions and carefully evaluated
tactics, experiments in transformist social practices could unleash new
violences, possibly producing even greater harms than those that currently
prevail.

Yet even if they were fully formulated, transformist strategies toward
globalization seem non-starters for the time being. As indicated in Chapter 1,
global socialism, anarchism and postmodernism at present only find favour
on the fringes of politics, with almost no following in powerful quarters. On
the contrary, as seen in Chapters 5-8, contemporary globalization has to date
deepened rather than reduced the forces of capitalism, bureaucratism,
communitarianism and rationalism. To be sure, radical critiques can inspire
individuals to attempt to practise alternative globalizations through their
personal life’s choices. However, the current balance of wider social forces is
such that it would be rash to expect full-scale reconfigurations of primary
social structures in the short or medium term. Transformism is a political
strategy for the long run.

Hence, given the various considerations discussed above, the broad policy
approach to globalization suggested here lies in a grey area where reformism
waxes into transformism. On the one hand, this politics places great faith in
the capacities of public policy - including in particular an expansion of
suprastate regulatory schemes - to improve the human consequences of
contemporary globalization. On the other hand, the perspective recognizes
that capitalism in respect of production, bureaucratism in respect of govern¬
ance, conventional communitarianism and cosmopolitanism in respect of
identity, and rationalism in respect of knowledge all have certain inherent
limitations when it comes to furthering human security, social equality and
democracy. Vigorous pursuit of reformist policies coupled with vigorous
exploration of transformist possibilities seems the best way forward in a more
global world. As noted later in this chapter, implementation of such a strat¬
egy faces major political hurdles, but with concerted efforts its realization lies
within the realm of the possible.



396 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Enhancing human security

Between laying out general strategy and evaluating challenges of implement¬
ation lies the identification of specific proposals that could translate a vision
of ambitious reformism coupled with cautious transformism into contempor¬
ary political practice. The next sections review various steps that could be
pursued in the short and medium term to give this agenda effect. Indeed, as
seen in preceding chapters, ruling elites have over the past decade already
taken some modest steps in reformist directions.

The first set of proposals addresses the concerns about human security
discussed in Chapter 9. The dozen points below could reduce the previously
identified harms in respect of military violence, crime, ecological degrada¬
tion, health problems, poverty, financial instability, unemployment, labour
exploitation, cultural damage, and social fragmentation. In line with ambi¬
tious reformism, the proposals give particular emphasis to the development
of global public policies through transworld institutions. That said, these
suprastate initiatives are not treated as a project of global government, but
within a context of polycentric governance where states and substate author¬
ities retain a major role. Capacity for effective regulation of global relations
needs to be developed across multi-scalar governance, rather than in
transworld institutions alone.

1 Human rights

Perhaps the most far-reaching progressive global public policy initiative
would be legally to subordinate all transplanetary governance to human
rights standards. Within democratic states, all national legislation normally
must conform to an overarching bill of rights or some similar instrument.
However, to date human rights have not similarly reigned supreme over
global regulation. Thus it has not been possible legally to judge the accept¬
ability or otherwise of global governance against the standards of, say, the
two global covenants on human rights signed in 1966 and in force since 1976.

This pair of covenants - one on civil and political rights, the other on
cultural, economic and social rights - could be raised to the status of a legally
binding and enforced transplanetary bill of rights. Perhaps suitable amend¬
ments of the existing principles might be necessary to obtain the agreement of
all states. Once in place, citizens would have a powerful formal mechanism
with which to require that suprastate policies vis-a-vis globalization did not
undermine human security - and on the contrary guaranteed at least mini¬
mum living standards. On this basis challenges could be brought against, for
example, IMF-sponsored macroeconomic reforms or WTO rulings when
such global governance measures violated basic rights.

A step of this kind seems achievable, given the significant advances that the



Future Globalizations 397


global human rights movement has already made since the 1940s. The past
decade has witnessed notable advances in establishing the International
Criminal Court with binding jurisdiction and judgments. A larger and longer
concerted campaign could place a bill of rights at the core of global gover¬
nance as a whole.

2 Arms control

As seen in Chapters 6 and 9, the growth of polycentric governance in the
context of globalization has included some development of transgovernment-
al, macro-regional and global regimes to limit the spread and use of
weapons. However, regulation to restrict the militarization of transplanetary
spaces could be considerably widened and upgraded. For example, policies
could be developed to ban not only nuclear proliferation and chemical
weapons, but also antiballistic missiles (ABMs). Such a measure would
prevent the spread of supraterritorial counter-weapons of the sort pursued by
the US Government in its Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) proposal of the
1980s and anti-missile tests of recent years. Apart from weapons of mass
destruction (WMD), regulation could also place far more effective controls
on cross-border trade in conventional arms.

In time these different mechanisms, together with the IAEA and the
OPCW, could be linked under an umbrella global arms control authority.
States would thereby cede some competence over the military field to supras-
tate governance, as they have already done to one degree or another in every
other policy area. Yet, as on other questions, it would be a case of a global
agency supplementing rather than supplanting state governance.


3 Conflict management

Other public policy mechanisms could increase protection against armed
violence when it looms or has already begun. For example, United Nations
peacekeeping operations could be enhanced with full-scale early-warning
mechanisms that link governments and civil society watchdogs to a conflict
prevention division of the Secretariat. UN contingents could then intercede in
trouble spots sooner and with better intelligence about local circumstances,
thereby averting a conflagration or at least reducing its damage.

Serious consideration could also be given to establishing a formal regime
of ‘peace building’ or even ‘peace enforcement’ (Daniel and Hayes, 1995).
Already in ad hoc cases like Cambodia and East Timor, UN-sanctioned mili¬
tary operations have gone beyond a traditional peacekeeping role to inter¬
vene proactively in ongoing wars and insurgencies. However, officially
sanctioned permanent procedures for so-called ‘second-generation’ peace¬
keeping would speed up reaction times and lend greater legitimacy to such



398 Nonnative and Policy Issues


operations. All manner of genocides and other humanitarian disasters might
be lessened or prevented as a result.

Peacekeeping and peace enforcement efforts could be bolstered with the
creation of permanent and specifically trained regional and global military
units. For fifty years multilateral armed contingents have been formed on an
ad hoc basis, often at a cost of precious time and extra political difficulties
that detract from their effectiveness. It would be far more efficient if bodies
like the UN and the African Union had their own troops available, although
great care would be required to ensure that such forces were publicly account¬
able.


4 Ecological security

To improve environmental conditions under increasingly globalized circum¬
stances, suprastate mechanisms to reduce ecological degradation could go
well beyond the existing measures described in Chapters 6 and 9. For
instance, the polluter-pays principle could be applied not only to greenhouse
gases under the Climate Convention and Kyoto Protocol, but also to sulphur
dioxide emissions, tropical wood consumption, pesticide use, air travel, and
more. Various financial incentives administered through local, national,
regional and global programmes could be employed to encourage the deve¬
lopment and use of renewable energy sources. Consumption of non-renew¬
able energy could be priced with attention to its environmental damage.
Global trade laws would need to incorporate ecological clauses to counter
commercial disincentives to the pursuit of important environmental legisla¬
tion.

In the private sector, meanwhile, companies could go beyond hijacking the
slogan of ‘sustainable development’ and make it a veritable core of their busi¬
ness practices (Heerings and Zeldenrust, 1995; Greer and Bruno, 1996;
Welford, 1997). Indeed, codes of conduct for global corporations could
include specific and enforceable environmental targets instead of broad
declarations of immeasurable and unmonitored aspirations. However, CSR
schemes should be supplements to rather than (as many corporate executives
have regarded them) substitutes for public policies on ecological sustainabil¬
ity.

Indeed, public transplanetary regulation of environmental problems
warrants a substantial upgrade with the creation of a Global Environmental
Organization (GEO) in place of a small and relatively marginalized body like
UNEP. A GEO would monitor and coordinate efforts that are currently
dispersed across several hundred multilateral environmental agreements and
associated commissions. A global environmental agency would also need to
work on a par with - rather than be subordinated to - other transworld
bodies, particularly those covering finance and trade. The framework of



Future Globalizations 399


global governance would then encourage careful negotiations between goals
of productivity and sustainability, as against existing institutional arrange¬
ments, which tend to enthrone economic efficiency above all other policy
objectives.

The promotion of ecological integrity is also an area where personal initia¬
tive can play a considerable role even when decisive public policy is absent.
Relevant steps might encompass recycling, limiting numbers of offspring, using
public transport rather than private motorcars, making ‘green’ consumer
choices in purchases of food and other household goods, and reducing
consumption generally. Of course public policies that promote such measures
have more effect than individual choices in isolation, but that fact is no reason
to persist with avoidable personal contributions to environmental damage.


5 Health treatment

Global public health has received even less attention in contemporary policy¬
making than the other areas of human security discussed so far; hence
proposals for the future build on a smaller and more fragile base of suprastate
regulation. One major advance in this area would be to undertake a substan¬
tial expansion of publicly funded research into illnesses and debilitations
whose treatment does not promise major commercial windfalls and therefore
tends to get neglected by private business. In the absence of such official inter¬
ventions, cold remedies for wealthy hypochondriacs will continue to attract
more scientific attention than prospective cures for malaria and tuberculosis.

Once treatments are available, global public policy measures could help to
ensure that all sufferers obtain access to the relief. ‘Market forces’ and exist¬
ing intellectual property rules give priority to the profits of several pharma¬
ceutical companies over the health of hundreds of millions of poor people.
States by themselves cannot take effective steps to control the global firms in
question, which often price medications well beyond the incomes of most of
humanity. And veritable access is required, as opposed to bureaucratic
labyrinths such as the 2003 WTO agreement, which has to date delivered no
noteworthy practical relief to AIDS patients in poor countries.

6 Socially sensitive economic restructuring

The growth of global production, finance and trade requires economic
adjustments, including some that can be highly disruptive and damaging.
However, the social costs need not be as heavy as those that have often
accompanied neoliberalist policies. Approaches to economic restructuring
under globalizing capitalism could therefore be reoriented so that issues like
the adequate provision of education, employment, health, and shelter gain
greater priority.



400 Nonnative and Policy Issues


To this end policy aims could be more ambitious than mildly reformist
initiatives like the MDGs at the UN, the PRSPs at the Bretton Woods institu¬
tions, and NEPAD at the G8. The mindset of ‘safety nets’ against the worst
deprivations wants replacement with an agenda of ‘social justice’ that offers
everyone maximal opportunities to pursue a good life. Relevant measures to
this more ambitious end fall mainly in the next section on enhancing social
equality under globalization.

In addition, in procedural terms, poverty eradication could be more
successfully achieved if the formulation and execution of policies of macro-
economic restructuring fully integrated relevant expertise from socially
geared bodies with that of economically adept institutions. Among global
agencies, then, UNDP and UNICEF would collaborate closely with the IMF
and the World Bank. At the same time, suprastate bodies that deal with struc¬
tural adjustment could work more closely with social departments of
national and local governments, as well as with trade unions, faith-based
social service providers, and socially oriented NGOs.


7 Debt relief

Another major policy step towards poverty eradication would be better
management of global debt problems. More could be done, building on the
initiatives described in Chapter 9, to combat the social harms of transworld
debts in much of the South. Relief could cover more borrowings, on more
generous terms, and at a faster rate than has been witnessed to date under the
HIPC. Where repayment difficulties are chronic, as in the case of many of the
poorest countries, global debts could be cancelled, as has already occurred on
several occasions. Moreover, the monies released through debt relief could be
earmarked for increased social spending. This principle has already governed
the HIPC programme and several cancellations of bilateral debts. Better debt
monitoring mechanisms could ensure that future borrowings do not repeat
the deplorable scenario of the past thirty years.

In cases where governments of so-called ‘middle-income countries’ default
on debt repayment, smoother and more predictable rescheduling processes
could be developed. In this regard proposals for a Sovereign Debt
Restructuring Mechanism (SDRM) could be resuscitated to handle crises of
the sort that have in recent years afflicted Argentina, Brazil and Turkey. The
SDRM would involve a global bankruptcy court that operated on US Chapter
Xl-like lines to work out the debt crises of borrower states, as an advance on
ad hoc IMF-led emergency rescues. The US Treasury and other major credit¬
ors regrettably sidelined the SDRM in 2002, in favour of reliance on national
courts in whose jurisdiction the debt contracts were signed. However, these
judges generally lack the expertise and the democratic legitimacy to deal with
foreign debtor states (Sgard, 2004).



Future Globalizations 401


8 Financial regulation

Other more ambitious measures to reconstruct the so-called ‘global financial
architecture’ could also be pursued. Public-sector regulation can harness
supraterritorial financial markets considerably more than neoliberalists have
tended to suggest. Just as ‘rocket scientists’ in the commercial sector have
developed ever more sophisticated financial instruments, so ‘high-flier’ regu¬
lators could devise ever more sophisticated supervisory mechanisms if the
requisite political weight were put behind the efforts.

One fairly modest move, already pursued by some governments since the
Asia crisis, is a more nuanced approach to capital controls. Even many main¬
stream economists now agree that liberalization of cross-border capital flows
should be timed and sequenced more carefully (Griffith-Jones, 1998). Indeed,
in some cases bars on capital transfers between countries (especially short¬
term credits) could serve positive purposes for economic and social develop¬
ment. More selective regulatory measures, too, could protect vulnerable
markets from speculative runs by global investors. For example, governments
could impose a special exchange rate on equity investments from abroad or
prohibit domestic borrowing by nonresidents (Williamson, 1999).

More ambitiously, states could collectively introduce a tax on foreign-
exchange transactions as a way to reduce speculation and volatility in that
enormous market. This proposal is generally known as the Tobin tax, named
after the economist James Tobin who first formulated the idea in 1971. A
fractional charge on foreign-exchange dealings would encourage greater
stability by eliminating many of the marginal profits that attract currency
speculators. Supporters of liberalized global finance have long rejected the
technical feasibility of a Tobin tax, but the CLS and other concerted efforts
could arguably overcome these challenges if the political will were present.
Since 1999 several parliaments (including those of Belgium, Canada and
Germany) have urged further development of a currency transactions tax, but
most financial regulators have remained resistant. (For more on the Tobin
tax, see Eichengreen etal., 1995; Haq etal., 1996; Schmidt, 1999; Patomaki,
2001 .)

More generally, global monetary and financial regulation could be consol¬
idated in a transplanetary financial authority. Such a body could be created
either by upgrading the IMF or by forming a new institution that fused and
superseded the IMF and the BIS (Gunter, 1996; Eatwell, 2000; Girvan,
2000). Whereas current IMF resources amount to only a small fraction of the
annual value of trade between countries, a global central bank would have
sufficient means at its disposal to provide emergency support in any crisis of
cross-border finance.

This transworld institution could also administer a distinct global currency
that filled the roles now covered by transplanetary national denominations



402 Nonnative and Policy Issues


like the US dollar and the Japanese yen. Possibly the SDR could be upgraded
into the sort of money that John Maynard Keynes envisioned in the early
1940s under the name of the ‘bancor’. Alternatively, some other supraterri-
torial currency could be devised, for example, with reference to the value of a
basket of the most traded commodities in global markets (Lietaer, 1996). In
any case a single transworld denomination of this kind could remove many of
the instabilities that the foreign exchange markets generate at present. The
introduction of a non-national global currency could also help to redress the
arbitrary inequalities that are bolstered when the denominations of already
powerful states take pride of place as transplanetary monies.

9 Job creation

As indicated in Chapter 9, global capitalism has posed major challenges to
employment prospects. An expansion of job support initiatives from public-
sector agencies could help to address this problem. For example, education and
training programmes can be reoriented in order better to equip workers with
the sorts of perspectives and skills (such as global thinking and computer liter¬
acy) that are central to labour in supraterritorial capitalism. In addition, fiscal
incentives could be devised that encourage employers to retain and retrain staff
as companies restructure in the face of globalization. More ambitiously, multi¬
lateral agencies could embark on job-creating global public works projects, for
example, to supply underprivileged parts of the planet with full telecommuni¬
cations services or to undertake programmes of environmental restoration.

In addition, more transformist inspirations could prompt policymakers
and citizens at large to think more critically about the nature of work in a
more global world. For example, public policies could discourage the expan¬
sion of sectors such as call centres that often exploit low-skilled workers and
vulnerable consumers alike. In addition, government and corporate policies
could increase job opportunities by reducing overwork among people in jobs,
thereby bettering their quality of life and at the same time creating new posi¬
tions. Needless to say, such a measure could only succeed if wages were set at
levels that made decreased working hours possible.

10 Labour standards

Other policy reorientations to improve the security of people in work are also
available. For example, the ILO could acquire greater capacities to monitor
and enforce compliance with its core conventions, say, with compulsory
dispute hearings of the kind that the WTO provides in regard to trade. Moves
could also be started toward the establishment of a global regime of minimum
wages, whose levels might for the time being be weighted in relation to the per
capita income of a country.



Future Globalizations 403


Further protection of labour conditions could be pursued outside the ILO.
For example, a chapter on workers’ rights could be included in the WTO as
well as all regional trade accords. In addition, security in the workplace could
be a prominent feature of an independently monitored and fully enforced
code of conduct for global companies. Such a regime of rigorous social audit¬
ing could perhaps be created with a further upgrade of the OECD Guidelines
for Multinational Enterprises.

Meanwhile workers themselves could improve their terms and conditions
in global capitalism by nurturing transplanetary solidarities beyond the
modest levels noted in Chapter 7. As Charles Tilly has argued, ‘chauvinistic
and protectionist responses will not defend labor’s effective rights. . . work¬
ers have to invent new strategies at the scale of international capital’ (1995:
20-1). A promising turn in this regard has seen the conclusion of several
collective bargaining agreements between a global company and a global
trade secretariat (rather than a national union). The first such accord was
reached in 1988 between Danone and the International Union of Food,
Agricultural, Hotel, Restaurant, Catering, Tobacco and Allied Workers’
Associations (IUF). Other agreements followed in the 1990s involving the
hotel chain ACCOR, the energy concern Statoil, and the furniture maker
IKEA together with, respectively, the IUF, the International Chemical,
Energy and Mining Workers, and the International Federation of Building
and Wood Workers (Justice, 1999: 7).

1 1 Cultural diversity

Various legal and institutional reforms could also bolster cultural security,
that is, safety and confidence in identities and accompanying frameworks of
meaning. For example, school curricula could do more to expose young
people to multiple histories and civilizations. States could do more (on the
lines described in Chapter 7) to accord formal recognition to minority
cultures. Macro-regional and transworld agencies could develop more sites
like the EU Committee of the Regions where micro-nations have a voice.
Suprastate economic governance in particular could be reformed in the direc¬
tion of greater cultural sensitivity.

More generally, institutions as well as individuals could nurture cultural
security in a globalizing world by developing what might be called an ‘inter-
culturalist’ approach to identity politics. Adopting this stance, encounters
between people with different identities and knowledges would be conducted
in a spirit of dialogue rather than confrontation. Reigning principles would
be mutual recognition, respect, responsibility and (when tensions rise)
restraint (Scholte, 1996: 595-600; 1999: 66-9, 80-3). Intercultural reci¬
procity contrasts fundamentally with the ‘us-them’ framework of communi-
tarianism, an approach that has tended to denigrate, exclude and suppress



404 Nonnative and Policy Issues


‘otherness’. In intercultural cosmopolitanism no one would impose their life-
world as a universal model. In the words of a Buddhist reformer, ‘We do not
want to have one value standard as the measure of others; each culture has its
own intrinsic values that need not be measured against others’ (Hutanuwatr,
2002). In such a spirit 6,500 people from different faiths met in a Parliament
of the World’s Religions at Chicago in 1993 to affirm a common global ethic
without erasing each other’s identity (Kiing and Kuschel, 1993). Such initia¬
tives demonstrate that it is possible to have human solidarity through cultural
difference.

12 Ethical investment

All of the preceding policy proposals could in different ways promote another
umbrella goal of human security in a more global world: namely, social cohe¬
sion. A further practicable reformist measure to this end is so-called ethical
investment, where savings are utilized in ways that avoid social ills (e.g., the
arms trade) and preferably also positively advance social goods (e.g., fair
trade programmes). A host of ethical investment schemes have already
become available, but both their number and their standards could be scaled
up considerably. Individual savers can further this cause with their personal
investment decisions. In addition, the movement can gain all the more impe¬
tus as and when large institutional players like trade union pension funds
demand that their investments meet high ethical standards.


Enhancing social equality

In addition to countering human security problems, other initiatives in the
spirit of ambitious reformism and cautious transformism can go some way
to reduce the social inequalities under globalization that were discussed in
Chapter 10. Indeed, a number of the measures to enhance human security
discussed above can simultaneously work to alleviate the inequities that
result from arbitrary social hierarchies. In regard to class, for example,
measures to eradicate poverty, improve employment conditions, and
increase social cohesion can at the same time lessen inequalities in life
chances between various socioeconomic groups. As for the stratification of
countries, steps to create socially sustainable structural adjustment, to
remove excessive debt burdens, and to stabilize financial markets can simul¬
taneously narrow gaps between the North and the South. Alternative iden¬
tity politics can reduce cultural hierarchies while promoting cultural
security. The following pages set out further proposals that specifically
target problems of social inequality.



Future Globalizations 405


1 Suprastate anti-monopoly mechanisms

Measures to counter centralizing tendencies in global capitalism (identified in
Chapter 5) could work against various social inequalities. After all, market
concentration has allowed investors and managers - who generally already
hold considerable wealth and power advantages over other classes - to accu¬
mulate undue levels of additional surplus. Winners of the global oligopoly
game have also been disproportionately white, male, urban and based in the
North.

Several anti-monopoly mechanisms could be developed in respect of
global capital. In macro-regional governance, for instance, other institu¬
tions could follow the example of the EU in establishing a regime of
competition rules. A rigorous global anti-monopoly framework could also
be developed, building on existing modest initiatives such as the UN
Restrictive Practices Code and the OECD Committee on Competition Law
and Policy. These efforts could bring the creation of a Global Competition
Office linked to the WTO (Fortin, 1992: 86-8) or a self-standing global
anti-trust authority.

2 Changes to global intellectual property rules

As noted in Chapter 10, existing suprastate rules governing intellectual
property disproportionately favour those in positions of advantage.
Regimes such as TRIPS could be amended so that predatory capitalists
cannot claim ownership of ideas, tools and techniques from marginalized
groups (like poor people in the South) who created them but are unaware of
the principle and workings of intellectual property. Likewise, IPRs could be
altered to prevent the commodification by powerful corporate interests of
traditional goods (medicines, plants, etc.) that were previously freely avail¬
able to the poor.

In other respects global intellectual property rules could be relaxed to
favour the South. After all, significant aspects of early industrialization in
the North were based on the exploitation of innovations from abroad,
without the intervention of global laws regarding patents, trademarks,
designs and copyrights. The application of stringent transplanetary intel¬
lectual property rights in effect denies poorer countries significant oppor¬
tunities that were available in a previous era to today’s North. Alternative
intellectual property regimes could establish a more equitable balance
between protections for innovators and opportunities for producers. One
modest initiative in this direction is the Creative Commons project that
seeks to replace the absolute ‘all rights reserved’ of traditional copyright
with a conditional ‘some rights reserved’ principle (Creative Commons,
2005).



406 Nonnative and Policy Issues


3 Global redistributive taxation

A third set of measures that could counter inequality in globalization relate to
transworld taxes. Various schemes for global taxes have circulated since the
1970s (Carlsson et al., 1995: 217-21; Wachtel, 2000). Much as progressive
taxation through states has worked against class and other arbitrary hierar¬
chies within countries, so transplanetary taxation through transworld insti¬
tutions could reduce inequities between classes and countries as they are
generated through global capitalism. In addition, the revenues gained from
global taxes could help to fund a number of programmes to enhance human
security, as covered in the preceding section. All of the taxes described below
are progressive: that is, they would apply mainly to the more wealthy sections
of humanity that are most able to pay them.

One especially appealing proposal for a global levy is the aforementioned
Tobin tax on foreign-exchange transactions. Given the huge volume of this
business, even a very low rate of this charge would yield substantial revenues
that could be used to improve the life opportunities of disadvantaged circles,
especially in poor countries, with improved education, health care, etc. As
wholesale foreign-exchange dealings mainly involve the richest circles, a
Tobin tax could achieve poverty alleviation through wealth alleviation.

Suprastate taxation of global corporations would be another measure to help
achieve a more equitable distribution of the gains of transplanetary capitalism.
The absence of transworld taxation of profits has allowed globally operating
companies to manipulate state tax frameworks to their advantage, for example,
through transfer pricing and offshore arrangements. Global taxation of corpor¬
ate profits could close such loopholes and ensure that big capital contributes its
due share to public funds. Another suprastate corporate tax to fund global
public goods could levy a fee on cross-border mergers and acquisitions.

Other possible global taxes include a ‘bit tax’ on data sent through the
Internet. Such a charge could generate more revenue than total world ODA
(HDR, 1999: 66). Meanwhile a levy of $100 on each patent registered with
the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) could have raised $350
million in 1998 (HDR, 1999: 74). Further transplanetary taxes could apply
to use of the so-called ‘global commons’, such as the deep seabed, the electro¬
magnetic spectrum, flight paths, sea lanes, and ocean fishing areas. Further
global taxes have been suggested in respect of cross-border arms sales and
transboundary pollution.

The administration of transplanetary taxes could be overseen through rele¬
vant existing global institutions (e.g., the BIS for a Tobin tax or the ITU for a
bit tax). Alternatively, a single global revenue service could be created for this
purpose. In either case the development of transplanetary taxes would make
issues concerning the democratization of globalization all the more urgent.
Indeed, transworld taxation could easily fail to advance social equality if



Future Globalizations 407


global governance remained captured by privileged circles owing to the
severe democratic deficits laid out in Chapter 11.

4 Abolition of offshore finance

Another significant step to create more equal opportunities in globalization
would be to dismantle offshore finance centres. Efforts through the OECD
since 2000 to censure tax havens for lack of transparency and poor coopera¬
tion with overseas tax authorities have been welcome; yet so far they have had
limited effect. Moreover, the OECD initiative has failed to address the core
ethical objection to offshore finance: namely, that these facilities allow people
with the greatest means to be free riders in a world replete with need and
inequality. True, offshore tax arrangements have generated some revenue for
the host governments, including in some poor countries. However, these
public funds have in most cases done little to eliminate underprivilege among
the local populations. As for employment, although offshore finance centres
have created some work, these jobs could also exist if the same deposits were
placed in onshore accounts. Tellingly, no one has articulated a convincing
economic or social justification for offshore finance centres. They should and
could be eliminated through global rules governing taxation.

5 North-South redistribution through global economic
regimes

A number of other reforms could reduce the hierarchies between countries
that have been reflected in, and substantially sustained by, global economic
regimes. To begin with, several steps could be taken to improve the
North-South balance in global economic decision taking. For example, votes
in the Bretton Woods institutions could be redistributed away from the
currently prevailing quota formula that has so heavily favoured major states
(Buira, 2003). In addition, the BIS and the OECD could further expand their
membership to encompass governments of poor as well as rich countries.
Meanwhile the central organs of the UN (where the South has greater repre¬
sentation and voting strength) could upgrade their involvement in global
economic governance with the creation of an Economic Security Council in
place of the existing rather limp Economic and Social Council (Carlsson et al .,
1995: 153-62).

Other reforms of globalization could aim to reduce North-South hierar¬
chies in particular sectors of the economy. In the area of global communica¬
tions, for example, many of the recommendations of the UNESCO-sponsored
MacBride Commission, published in 1980, remain relevant for the twenty-
first century (UNESCO, 1980; Golding and Harris, 1997). To highlight one
specific proposal, more resources could be dedicated to the development of



408 Nonnative and Policy Issues


organizations like the Caribbean News Agency and the Inter Press Service
that advance Southern perspectives in global journalism (Musa, 1997).

In respect of global money, the IMF could distribute substantial new allo¬
cations of SDRs largely if not exclusively to the South. This so-called ‘SDR-
aid link’ could provide poor countries with more foreign exchange reserves
and (if the cumulative SDR allocations were sufficiently large) could decrease
the dominance in the world economy of North-based currencies. In another
step to bolster the position of the South in global monetary affairs, poor states
could be accorded greater resources to build up their central banks, making
them less dependent in monetary and financial policy on suprastate agencies
like the Bretton Woods institutions.

In the area of global credit, since commercial markets largely lock out poor
countries, multilateral development banks could provide increased loans to
the South on concessionary terms. In particular, more long-term low-interest
credits of the kind supplied through the International Development
Association (an arm of the World Bank) could be made available to the poor¬
est countries. In addition, expanded micro-credit schemes could channel
more global finance to low-income circles (especially women) in the South
(Holcombe, 1995; Johnson and Rogaly, 1997).

Various other reforms could improve North-South distribution in respect
of global trade. For instance, suprastate initiatives could accomplish much
more than the previously mentioned GSP and ACP arrangements have done
to reduce trade barriers for the South to markets of the North. In particular
the abolition of agricultural subsidies in the North is long overdue. Scope also
exists for a large expansion of alternative trade schemes of the kind described
in Chapter 10. Meanwhile the WTO could develop commodity regimes that
would enhance export earnings for poor countries of key primary products,
for example, with guaranteed minimum prices.


6 Gender sensitivity

Much could be done to advance equality between men and women in global
relations simply by raising awareness of gender issues. Official, corporate and
civil society agencies often contribute to gender inequality in good part
because they are blind to social constructions of sex roles. To counter this
tendency the United Nations Secretariat has over the past decade promoted
so-called ‘gender mainstreaming’, whereby the assessment of implications for
women and men is made integral to the design, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation of any policy action. Gender assessments could also be intro¬
duced in transworld agencies like the BIS and the WTO that have hitherto
lacked such mechanisms. In addition, the development activities of multilat¬
eral agencies could extend recent steps specifically to target female poverty.
Structural adjustment packages sponsored by suprastate bodies could be



Future Globalizations 409


reconstructed with greater regard to the gendered impacts of these
programmes. Global labour standards could give more direct and systematic
attention to promoting equal opportunities for women and men in the work¬
place. Care work as discussed in Chapter 5 could receive greater policy recog¬
nition and attention. Labour protection measures with special relevance to
women could be developed, for example, in relation to the global sex trade
and migrant domestic workers. At the same time greater resources could be
dedicated to the promotion of women’s human rights through CEDAW and
other suprastate mechanisms. Collectively, such steps could bring gender
concerns to the heart of global public policy.

7 Women in global leadership

Gender inequalities could be further redressed in globalization with the
appointment of more women to executive positions in suprastate governance
agencies, transworld companies, and global civil society associations. On the
whole women tend to have greater awareness of and sympathy toward
gender justice issues. Even where certain women executives lack these sensi¬
tivities, they can still by their example demonstrate the possibilities and
accomplishments of female leadership in global organizations.

8 Attention to race, urban/rural and age hierarchies

Along with reforms that address class, country and gender inequalities,
further measures could be taken to counter subordinations in globalization of
people of colour, rural populations, children and the elderly. Several existing
initiatives in these areas by UN agencies and various civil society associations
were mentioned in Chapter 10. However, just as problems of race,
urban/rural divides and age have been less studied in relation to globalization
than those of class, North/South divides and gender, so too fewer specific
proposals for corrective action have emerged. More attention could be given
to assessing and redressing these generally less highlighted forms of stratifi¬
cation in transplanetary spaces. The principle of policy mainstreaming could
be applied to these hierarchies as well as those of gender.

Taking the above eight broad suggestions together, it is clear that global
public policies and other measures in the vein of ambitious reformism mixed
with cautious transformism could make substantial inroads into the inequal¬
ities that have developed in globalization to date. True, many socialists have
concluded that the tensions between capitalism and distributive justice run so
deep that only a full-scale transformation of the mode of production can
remove arbitrary hierarchies from social relations. Yet, even if this argument
is accepted in principle, it remains possible and desirable to pursue reforms



410 Nonnative and Policy Issues


that lessen social inequalities within capitalism, especially if acceptable and
feasible post-capitalist alternatives are not immediately in sight.


Enhancing democracy

In keeping with the threefold conception of normative politics pursued in Part
III of this book, improvements in globalization need to address questions of
democracy together with those of human security and social equality. Indeed,
some of the measures mentioned in the preceding two sections could also
promote greater democracy in global relations. In particular, as stressed in
Chapter 11, social equality and democracy are inextricably interlinked, so
that suggested policies to reduce arbitrary hierarchies at the same time could
increase opportunities for subordinated people to participate in global poli¬
tics. Likewise, with respect to human security, policies to eradicate poverty,
improve employment conditions, and deepen social cohesion also create
circumstances in which people are better able actively to involve themselves
in processes of collective self-determination.

The present section considers further measures that directly address the
educational, institutional and structural problems with democracy in
contemporary globalization that were identified in Chapter 11. Some of the
proposals focus on changes to suprastate institutions, but others suggest
initiatives involving substate and state mechanisms. In this way local and
national democracy are seen to be part of global democracy. Notions that
state and local governments have no role in the democratization of globaliza¬
tion would be decidedly misplaced.

1 Subsidiarity

Not only do state and substate governments have an important place in
global democracy, but their role in governing transplanetary relations could
wherever possible be enhanced relative to suprastate institutions. Yes, for
reasons elaborated in Chapter 6, significant elements of macro-regional and
transworld regulation are indispensable for effective governance of a more
global world. Moreover, as the following paragraphs indicate, there are
multiple ways to bring substantially greater democracy to suprastate govern¬
ance. That said, the default position for more democratic regulation of glob¬
alization would be, following the principle of subsidiarity, wherever possible
to devolve legislation and its implementation to the smallest and nearest
sphere, where individual citizens (especially those with limited means)
usually have their greatest opportunities for direct involvement in policy
processes.

In particular, public participation and public accountability in the



Future Globalizations 411


governance of global flows could be considerably enhanced with further
devolution to substate authorities. Wherever possible, at least part of the
formulation and execution of policies relating to global concerns could involve
local government and local civil societies. Provincial, district and municipal
bodies are often best placed to gauge and reflect the local pulse on global prob¬
lems as these issues affect specific people in specific contexts. Substate author¬
ities could on suitable occasions use public hearings or referenda to consult
constituents on matters concerning global relations as they impact upon that
locality. In this vein villages and districts in Thailand convened Civic Forums
in the late 1990s to deliberate the use of a Social Investment Fund sponsored
by the World Bank in the wake of the Asia financial crisis.

Of course, to reiterate a caution emphasized in earlier chapters, local poli¬
tics are not ‘naturally’ democratic. The local is not inherently more genuine
and generous than other arenas. Devolution is therefore not a magic formula
for democratic globalization. Moreover, as global relations expand further,
people may increasingly refashion the local in supraterritorial terms, for
example, around websites and transworld conferences. These qualifications
made, substate governments and local civil societies could still play a much
greater role in governing transplanetary connections than has generally
occurred to date.

2 Public education

As emphasized in the previous chapter, ‘rule by the people’ cannot prevail in
the governance of globalization if most people are largely ignorant of what
the trend involves and the rules and regulatory institutions that relate to
transplanetary issues. Thus another key step towards more democratic future
globalizations would be to upgrade public awareness of the subject. This rise
in consciousness could be achieved through curricular reforms in schools and
universities, through improved mass media coverage of global problems and
their governance, and through enhanced public education efforts by regula¬
tory agencies and civil society associations.

Public education about globalization and its governance could promote
either more modest or more radical democratization. More reformist peda¬
gogy would alert citizens to institutional aspects of governing globalization
and the ways that the regulatory bodies in question have and have not oper¬
ated democratically. More transformist approaches to public education
would put the spotlight on structural inequalities in globalization and the
ways that governance processes either reinforce or counter those obstacles to
democracy. The aim of radical pedagogy would be to give people, especially
the oppressed, knowledge that advances their struggles against social injus¬
tice. In these cases learning about globalization is part of a larger strategy of
public mobilization for progressive change.



412 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Public education about globalization needs to be designed for diverse audi¬
ences, including marginalized circles in particular. Textbook learning in the
classroom best suits more academically inclined citizens, who tend to be
drawn disproportionately from socially privileged classes. Yet public educa¬
tion must also address those people, often in subordinated positions, who
would gain greater insight into global affairs from other methods of learning,
such as informal discussion groups, rallies and artistic performances.
Moreover, in order to have greater democratic effect, educational materials
on global affairs need to be available in local languages.

3 Transparency

Public education on globalization and its governance is greatly facilitated to
the extent that the regulatory processes in question are visible to citizens.
Hence a third step to promote greater democracy in globalization would be
to improve the transparency of relevant policymaking processes. As noted in
Chapter 11, a number of institutions involved in governing globalization
have already taken notable steps to open their proceedings to public scrutiny,
but much more can still be done. The regulatory agencies concerned could
disclose more documents, produce more publications, issue more press
releases, and maintain more extensive websites. In addition, the governance
institutions in question could make greater efforts to present materials in
ways that are more accessible to the lay citizen: for example, with non-tech-
nical terminology, translation into local languages, and user-friendly
websites. The resulting greater transparency could make it easier for inter¬
ested citizens to determine what decisions regulatory bodies have taken, from
among what options, and on what grounds. People could then be better
equipped to judge whether a given substate, state, suprastate or private govern¬
ance organization was acting competently, ethically, and in their interest.


4 Electoral politics

Further democratization of globalization could be achieved through a rein-
vigoration of electoral processes. Campaigns for local, national and regional
assemblies could give more attention to global issues inter alia through elec¬
tion rallies, candidate debates, and the platforms of political parties. Voters
could thereby become more aware of global questions, and the selection of
governors could - far more than at present - test public views on, for instance,
the way that a regulatory institution is responding to global ecological prob¬
lems or global economic developments.

Democracy could also be furthered with increased use of public referenda
on major questions of governing globalization. In this way the electorate -
rather than a cabinet, legislature or court - would have the final say on a



Future Globalizations 413


state’s accession to key multilateral institutions and agreements. To be sure,
effective democracy through referenda presupposes a competent electorate
following improved public education and greater transparency on global
matters.


5 Nonterritorial constituencies

In order more effectively to reflect the full range of public sentiments in the
contemporary more global world, legislative institutions could be refash¬
ioned to include nonterritorial as well as territorial representatives. As elabo¬
rated in Chapter 7, people have in the context of intensified globalization
increasingly acquired identities and associated social bonds that are not based
on territorial location and state-centred nationality. Yet few current govern¬
ance frameworks include a formal recognition of nonterritorial interests
connected with age, caste, class, diaspora, disability, faith, gender, race or
sexual orientation.

Various mechanisms could be put in place to ensure that nonterritorial
voices are guaranteed the representation that territorially based constituen¬
cies have generally denied them. For example, certain seats in legislative arms
on the various tiers of polycentric governance could be specifically designated
for business executives, communities of belief, disabled persons, farmers,
sexual minorities, women, workers, etc. Such a principle has already oper¬
ated in the national congress of Indonesia. In suprastate governance each of
the main global and regional institutions could, alongside its existing cham¬
ber of state delegates, acquire a permanent civic assembly with seats allocated
to nonterritorial constituencies. Such a mix of territorial and nonterritorial
chambers would better reflect the realities of contemporary identity politics.


6 Parliamentary oversight

Another set of steps towards greater democracy in the regulation of trans¬
planetary affairs would upgrade the monitoring and control of policies on
globalization by representative assemblies. For instance, national congresses
could exercise far closer scrutiny over the ratification and implementation of
treaties concerning global matters. State legislatures could also perform much
more rigorous oversight of their government’s involvement in transstate
networks and suprastate agencies. Parliamentary examination of private
governance mechanisms could enhance the public transparency and account¬
ability of those instruments. In all of these ways state legislatures could place
greater democratic checks on the unelected technocrats who have held most
of the initiative in governing global affairs to date.

In line with earlier urgings for devolution, representative bodies in substate
governance could also more thoroughly review policies on globalization, for



414 Nonnative and Policy Issues


example, by examining the local impacts of suprastate policies. A positive
development in this direction has seen many municipal assemblies monitor
the local application of Agenda 21, the manifesto that resulted from the Earth
Summit of 1992. In addition, district and provincial assemblies could exercise
greater democratic control over, for example, arrangements made by
substate governments in regard to global companies or global credits.

In addition to upgrading national and local processes, legislative oversight
of the governance of global issues could be enhanced with the creation of
more interparliamentary instruments. Transstate networks of legislators of
the kind that have already emerged for environmental issues through the
GLOBE network could also be developed in regard to transplanetary aspects
of culture, employment, finance, health, and trade. In addition, interparlia¬
mentary bodies could be constructed to scrutinize each major global govern¬
ance institution, not just the World Bank as at present.

Alternatively, these legislative networks could be formally integrated as
parliamentary organs within the transworld bodies. In this case each member
state would - as already occurs in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council
of Europe - designate several of its sitting national legislators to participate in
a global congress for the FAO, the IMF, the WTO, etc. These indirectly
elected bodies would meet at regular intervals to review the policies of the
global agency concerned.

In the longer term one could perhaps move to the construction of directly
elected transworld parliaments. However, for reasons indicated in Chapter
11, such a step looks for the time being to remain impracticable and in some
senses also undesirable. On the other hand, directly elected representative
assemblies could be introduced to additional regional governance frame¬
works like ASEAN, MERCOSUR and SADC as these bodies reach a greater
degree of institutional development.


7 Judicial processes

In addition to legislative oversight, another avenue for increased public
accountability in the governance of globalization is through judicial reviews
of policy decisions and their consequences. Individually and through civil
society associations, citizens could make greater use of relevant courts,
inspectorates and ombudspersons to obtain redress for errors and omissions
committed by policymakers in regard to global issues. In addition, new
accountability instruments could be created where they are currently not
available (for example, an external evaluation office for the WTO).

Within state and substate government, citizens could use judicial processes
to press for a national or local authority’s compliance with the global conven¬
tions or plans of action that it has endorsed. In addition, state and substate
courts or other policy evaluation mechanisms could be accessed to demand



Future Globalizations 415


compensation for harms caused by flawed national and local policies towards
global flows of one kind or another. Similarly, citizens could make more use
of state and substate courts to sue global organizations for damages caused
within the jurisdiction of those judicial bodies. Particular attention could be
given to enhancing access for marginalized people to judiciary mechanisms.
In this way global bodies such as UNHCR, Citibank or Greenpeace would
face greater grassroots accountability.

Where global courts are not in prospect to adjudicate on the actions and
inactions of suprastate agencies, efforts can focus on improving other means
for public evaluation of their programmes and projects. UN bodies, the BIS
and the OECD could acquire the sorts of mechanisms (like external policy
evaluations and ombudspersons) that have been introduced at the Bretton
Woods institutions since the mid-1990s. Meanwhile the IMF and World Bank
inspectorates could increase the range and frequency of their policy assess¬
ments. Both the existing and prospective accountability processes could take
more evidence directly from affected citizens, particularly through relevant
civil society associations that involve subordinated groups, as opposed to rely¬
ing solely on submissions from technocratic ‘experts’ in official circles. To
encourage their autonomy, policy auditors of suprastate agencies could be
appointed by, and responsible to, an outside body and not (as sometimes
currently happens) the institution whose policy is being reviewed. The results
of these evaluations would normally be released to the public with an invita¬
tion for reactions, and the agency concerned would follow up each assessment
report with a published and carefully monitored action plan to address any
well-founded criticisms and recommendations.


8 Public control of private governance

The preceding proposals have mainly focused on public governance bodies;
however, the democratization of globalization also needs to encompass the
private regulatory mechanisms discussed in Chapter 6. On the one hand,
greater democratic participation and accountability could be developed in
relation to bodies such as the IASB and ICANN by integrating procedures of
public consultation and public evaluation into their policy processes.
Increased relations with parliamentary bodies and civil society associations
would be ways to achieve this end.

That said, fuller democratization demands the eventual abolition of the
regulation of global affairs through private bodies. Governance agencies for
public affairs that are formally appointed by and responsible to private inter¬
ests fundamentally contradict democratic principles. CSR schemes and the
like might be justified as transitional stopgaps in situations where public
global governance is at present absent or underdeveloped. However, they are
not long-term substitutes for public institutions.



416 Nonnative and Policy Issues


9 Civil society development

Several earlier proposals have already mentioned the potentials of civil soci¬
ety contributions to the democratization of globalization. Indeed, a larger
quantity and higher quality of civil society engagement of transplanetary
issues could greatly enhance public education, public debate, public partici¬
pation, public transparency and public accountability in the governance of
global affairs. In addition, reformist and transformist initiatives by citizen
groups (e.g., to promote debt cancellation or changes in intellectual property
laws) could help to reduce the social inequalities that have so often frustrated
democracy in respect of transworld problems (Scholte, 2004b: ch 3).

Major increases of resources would be necessary in order more fully to
realize the democratizing potentials of civil society activities on global issues.
Partly these greater means could be obtained from larger memberships that
paid larger subscriptions. In addition, institutional sponsors like philan¬
thropic foundations could increase their support of civil society programmes
that address global affairs. Governments could amend statutes where existing
laws inhibit the operations of civil society organizations. For instance, legal
changes could introduce tax-exempt status for these associations where it is
currently absent. For the rest, civil society bodies working on global issues
could sometimes coordinate their efforts more carefully and share informa¬
tion more generously with each other. In some cases competition between
organizations for funds, members, and the moral high ground has under¬
mined civil society capacities to influence policy.

Civil society bodies could also upgrade their democratization of globaliza¬
tion through internal organizational improvements. For example, many of
these citizen groups could give more attention to their self-education on global
affairs, so that they would be better equipped to educate the wider public. Civil
society associations could also take proactive steps to enhance the participa¬
tion in their activities of subordinated social circles, thereby countering the
tendency in much of civil society to reproduce the hierarchies of wider society.
In addition, civil society groups could take greater care to nurture their own
public transparency and accountability (Scholte, 2004b: ch 5).

Meanwhile governance agencies (substate, state and suprastate alike)
could improve their mechanisms for engagement with citizen groups on
global issues. For instance, regulatory bodies could appoint more specialist
civil society liaison officers, and other staff could be given better training and
greater incentives to develop links with civil society interlocutors. In-country
representatives of suprastate agencies could meet on a regular basis with local
citizen organizations. In these consultations officials could give particular
attention to reaching marginalized constituencies. For the rest, governing
authorities could do more to involve civil society associations in official
conferences and to involve themselves in civil society events.



Future Globalizations 417


In sum, a number of eminently feasible measures are available to bring
greater public participation and public accountability to the regulation of
transplanetary affairs. Global democracy is therefore not an oxymoron.
Overall, the above nine proposals have a mainly reformist thrust, albeit that
they consistently urge proactive steps to involve structurally disadvantaged
people. In addition, a more thorough democratization of globalization could
be achieved if the above initiatives were combined with the proposals in the
preceding section for progressive redistribution of world resources and the
suggestions discussed in relation to cultural security for alternative identity
politics.


Towards implementation

It is relatively easy to compile wish lists. It is something else to get wishes
fulfilled. The past decades have seen the production of countless glossy
reports with attractive proposals for more humane courses of globalization.
Some suggestions (like the target ODA for OECD member states of 0.7 per
cent of GDP) have been repeated for decades without effect. Such stalemates
have encouraged cynicism in some quarters about the prospects for substan¬
tive policy change on matters of global order. The present discussion would
therefore be incomplete - and could seem facilely utopian - if it did not
consider the challenges of moving from the drawing board to concrete
actions. This chapter is not the place to develop detailed plans to guide partic¬
ular campaigns for specific policy alterations. However, it is important to
identify the general circumstances that both favour and hinder the imple¬
mentation of projects to reconstruct globalization on ambitiously reformist
and cautiously transformist lines.


Auspicious circumstances

A number of current conditions favour a shift to more humane globalizations
than the currently prevailing neoliberalist orientations. To begin with, the
technical means are available as never before to pursue effective global public
policies for reformist change and to activate global social movements for
transformist change. Innovations in information and communications tech¬
nologies have made possible unprecedented degrees of transplanetary policy
coordination. Transworld governance institutions and global civil society
organizations have developed further than ever. No doubt additional
advances in these areas are necessary in order fully to realize the sorts of
future globalizations proposed in this chapter. However, wide-ranging and
deeply influential global public policies and global citizen movements are no
longer social science fiction.



418 Nonnative and Policy Issues


As well as technical conditions, various political circumstances also favour
new directions in globalization. For one thing, people have generally become
far more aware of, and concerned about, global problems. True, as repeat¬
edly urged in the last two chapters, far more public education is needed on
globalization and its governance. Yet it is easy to forget how much more glob¬
ally conscious policymakers and citizens at large have already become in the
past half-century. To this extent people today are on the whole markedly
more receptive to notions of global regulation than previous generations.

Also auspicious for the implementation of alternative future globaliza¬
tions is the growth of cosmopolitan attachments that was described in
Chapter 7. Although most people continue to identify their community and
their destiny heavily in terms of countries and localities, nonterritorial
transworld identities (including transplanetary humanity) now also attract
notable support in many quarters. As a result, citizens are today more
inclined to see their interests on a wide range of issues served at least partly
through global public policies.

Politics in the early twenty-first century furthermore favours redirections
of globalization owing to the growth of alter-globalization sentiments.
Significant proportions of citizens are expressing dissatisfaction with prevail¬
ing neoliberalist policies and showing themselves to be receptive to different
approaches. For example, the Jubilee 2000 Coalition mobilized millions of
people across more than 60 countries in favour of increased debt relief for the
South (Collins et al., 2001). The global Making Poverty Flistory campaign
does similarly at present. Likewise, the World Social Forum process (includ¬
ing its regional, national and local offshoots) has proved far larger and more
sustained than even its most optimistic proponents imagined at the outset in
2001 .

Finally, circumstances are auspicious for new courses of globalization
inasmuch as ruling elites have gained incentives to support change. Many
(though far from all) governance leaders, corporate executives, mainstream
journalists, and orthodox academics have acknowledged that reforms to
globalization are needed if the social structures that underpin their power
(like capitalism and rationalism) are to remain sustainable. Even the biggest
winners of neoliberalist globalization have felt some discomforts of ecologi¬
cal insecurity, financial instability and ambiguous identities. Even the great¬
est ideologues of neoliberalism have noted vocal and sometimes also violent
opposition to their cause. Flence recent politics have witnessed the previ¬
ously noted retreats from ultra-liberalism. Dominant circles aim to keep
change to a minimum, of course, and to neutralize dissent with limited
concessions. However, proponents of more far-reaching redirections of
globalization can exploit this receptiveness to reform among ruling elites to
push the agenda beyond ‘Washington Plus’ to fully fledged global public
policies.



Future Globalizations 419


Challenges

Not everything is hopeful in the politics of alter-globalizations, though. For
one thing, advocates of major change must not underestimate the continuing
force of neoliberalist policy frameworks. ‘Free market’ approaches retain
very powerful backing: from commercial quarters, including big capital in
particular; from official quarters, including economic and financial policy¬
makers in particular; and from knowledge-producing quarters, including
mainstream mass media and social scientists in particular. Although many
public pronouncements from these elites have in recent years conveyed a
rhetoric of reform, internal discourses within ruling circles have moved far
less. The challenge to deconstruct neoliberalist orthodoxy remains daunting.
Support for laissez-faire, market-led globalization has deep material and
ideational roots. Materially, neoliberalist approaches to globalization have
created wealthy, privileged and powerful winners. Ideologically, many
proponents of neoliberalism have supported this policy orientation with well-
meaning conviction and in some cases evangelical fervour. To date few lead¬
ing beneficiaries of neoliberalist globalization have followed the examples of
the financier George Soros and the economist Joseph Stiglitz in turning to
vigorous critique of the approach (Soros, 1998; Stiglitz, 2002).

A second and related major obstacle that stands in the way of alter-global-
ization politics are the strong monopoly tendencies that have developed in
capitalism under neoliberalist policies of the past decades. The main corpor¬
ate players in contemporary globalization have become very big and very
strong. True, outside observers can overestimate the power of global capital.
Large transworld companies are not monolithic actors with omnipotent
executives at the helm. However, big capital can normally marshal far greater
material and ideological resources than the proponents of change.
Movements for alternative globalizations therefore need to be conducted in
ways that do not provoke concentrated capital to wield its greater power to
block the campaigns.

A third big challenge for proponents of redirected globalization is the
current concentration of governance power in the US government, coupled
with the unreceptiveness of successive US administrations towards the
development of full-scale global public policies. The problem is partly struc¬
tural: the Washington-based state has far more influence than is democrati¬
cally healthy, both within its own territorial jurisdiction and across the
wider world. The problem is also partly national: as noted in Chapter 4, the
political culture of US ruling circles has certain qualities (e.g. messianism,
manichaeism, and militarism) that tend to make these elites disinclined to
engage fully in multilateralism. Although these difficulties have been parti¬
cularly pronounced during the current presidency of George W. Bush, they
have figured to significant degrees in all US administrations, of both



420 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Democrat and Republican parties, across the past half-century of intense
globalization.

A fourth major challenge to the implementation of alternative globaliza¬
tions - the continuing pull of the sovereignty principle - resides both in the
USA, where it has been particularly strong, and across the rest of the planet.
The proposals for change laid out in this chapter involve considerably
increased authority for both substate and suprastate agencies. Moves toward
polycentric governance have already progressed considerably, as indicated in
Chapter 6. A large expansion of global public policy on the lines described
above would extend this trend further and make old notions of sovereignty
even more impracticable than they have already become. Still, myths of
Westphalian-style sovereignty continue to have widespread currency and
attraction. Many people still insist that unilateral, supreme, comprehensive
and absolute authority (usually placed in a nation-state) does - or can and
should - prevail. These circles need to be persuaded that post-statist govern¬
ance is not only inevitable in a more global world, but potentially more
liberating as well. Contrary to their hopes, continued invocation of
Westphalian ideas of sovereignty actually hinders rather than enhances the
possibilities of collective self-determination in respect of transplanetary
issues.

Fifth, successful implementation of far-reaching global public policies
faces the challenge of building sufficient institutional capacity. A turn from
neoliberalism to global social democracy requires that public governance
bodies obtain considerably increased means to regulate effectively. In some
cases the agencies need a larger bulk of resources: more staff, more funds,
more equipment, more offices, more data, and so on. In other cases the organ¬
izations need to deploy existing resources differently to acquire new capa¬
cities. Suprastate institutions in particular lack enough means at present to
execute a programme of ambitiously reforming and cautiously transforming
globalization. However, proposals for large increases in resources to regional
and transworld authorities are likely to face considerable resistance. Even the
IMF, while promoting a neoliberalist agenda, has endured a succession of
long and hard struggles since the late 1970s to obtain increased quotas, especi¬
ally from the US Congress. In addition, the various suprastate organizations
need vastly to improve their capacities of coordination with each other, in
place of the debilitating turf battles and other rivalries that have often
hampered global governance to date. Meanwhile, state and substate tiers of
governance need to acquire sufficient means to coordinate policy successfully
with suprastate bodies. If transplanetary public policies are to be made
appropriate to the particular conditions of different countries and districts,
then state and substate agencies need to be equipped to achieve that global-
local fit. Likewise, representative organs in state and local governments must
acquire the capacities to exercise informed democratic checks of the sort



Future Globalizations 421


recommended earlier on macro-regional and transworld authorities. In short,
the struggle to change globalization involves struggles to supply the institu¬
tional means to effect that change.

Still another, sixth, major challenge for efforts to redirect globalization
on more humane tracks is to mobilize larger publics behind these propos¬
als. Although Jubilee 2000, the WSF and a range of consumer boycotts have
impressively demonstrated the possibilities of ‘people power’ in the politics
of globalization, effective public pressure for global change has to date been
the exception rather than the rule. Much more needs to be done - through
both general public education on globalization and specific campaigns for
specific proposals - to build constituencies for a transworld anti-monopoly
mechanism, a transplanetary central bank, redistributive global taxes, and
alternative identity politics. Different, more progressive courses of global¬
ization cannot be imposed from above. Neoliberalists have usually pursued
their agenda with top-down politics, an approach that has generally proved
untenable in the long run. Advocates of change must not repeat this
mistake.

Finally, implementation of alternative, more humane globalizations must
avoid the neoliberalist error of cultural imperialism by constructing funda¬
mentally different kinds of identity politics. This is much easier said than
done. Built up over centuries, the immense hubris of western modernism
readily stands in the way of veritable intercultural communication and nego¬
tiation over the course of globalization. The very proposals outlined in this
chapter have a heavily west-centric character. Good intentions notwith¬
standing, this package of ambitious reformism and cautious transformism
could easily become yet another form of neo-colonial imperialism. Thus,
rather than being a fixed set of political objectives, the suggestions made here
would better be offered up for intercultural deliberations that would no
doubt refashion the policies in ways that could attract wider support. The
outcome could be something of a global social contract, where parties from
different sectors and cultures reach a transplanetary condominium that is
politically sustainable.


Conclusion

In a word, this chapter has argued that alternative globalizations are possi¬
ble, albeit also difficult to achieve. The harms of intensified globality experi¬
enced over the past half-century are not integral to transplanetary
connectivity as such. As summarized in the box below, many initiatives
could steer globalizations toward greater human security, social equality
and democracy.



422 Nonnative and Policy Issues


Towards more humane globalizations

Enhancing human security

• subordinate all global governance to human rights standards

• improve regimes for transworld arms control

• upgrade suprastate mechanisms of conflict management

• enhance global rules and regulatory institutions for environmental
protection

• develop proactive global public policies on health

• highlight the social dimensions of global economic restructuring

• provide better management of global debts, including cancellation
where the burdens are unsustainable

• expand suprastate regulation of global finance

• increase public policies for job creation while also rethinking the nature
of work

• intensify suprastate promotion of labour standards

• raise the priority of cultural security and develop ethics of intercultural-
ism to further it

• promote ethical investment practices

Enhancing social equality

• develop suprastate mechanisms to counter monopoly tendencies in
global capitalism

• amend global intellectual property rules in favour of subordinated
countries and classes

• introduce progressive global taxes

• abolish offshore finance arrangements

• pursue North-South redistribution through changes to global
economic regimes

• integrate gender justice concerns into all governance of globalization

• appoint more women to global leadership positions

• increase attention to race, urban/rural, age and other discriminations in
global relations

Enhancing democracy

• adopt subsidiarity as a default principle for governing globalization

• improve public education on global affairs

• further raise transparency in the governance of global relations

• reinvigorate electoral politics to give more attention to global concerns

• provide better representation of nonterritorial constituencies in legisla¬
tive assemblies

• increase parliamentary scrutiny of policies on globalization

• enhance the role of courts, inspectorates and ombudspersons in govern¬
ing globalization




Future Globalizations 423


• heighten public control of private governance mechanisms that touch
public interest and eventually abolish them

• upgrade the involvement of civil society associations in the governance
of global relations

Exploiting the possibilities

• enabling technological and organizational developments

• greater public awareness of global problems

• larger transworld solidarities among people

• unprecedented levels of popular mobilization on globalization issues

• increased receptiveness among elites to reform policies on globalization

Addressing the challenges

• continuing substantial force of neoliberalism

• large power of big capital

• resistance of the dominant US state to global public policy

• persistent attachments to myths of (Westphalian) sovereignty

• underdeveloped institutional capacities to formulate and implement
global public policies

• limited popular constituencies for far-reaching policy innovations

• inexperience with ethics of interculturalism, particularly among west¬
ern modernists


Admittedly this chapter has provided only a sketch of more humane redi¬
rections of globalization. Further research (some of it already being under¬
taken by others) is needed to work out the details of the various proposals, to
assess more precisely the technicalities of implementation, and to calculate
more exactly the likely impacts of the measures. In addition, further political
analysis (some of it already ongoing) is needed to determine the most effective
ways of overcoming resistance against and building momentum for alterna¬
tive trajectories of globalization.

However, these detailed investigations go beyond the scope of the present
book. This chapter has sought to lay the ground for such work by establish¬
ing the key point that major change of globalization is available and desir¬
able. The concern should not be that people are powerless in the face of
neoliberalist policies; rather, our disquiet should be that we have not done
more to exploit the substantial potentials to chart more progressive courses
of globalization.




Conclusion


To boil a dozen chapters down to half a dozen sentences, this critical intro¬
duction to globalization has advanced the following replies to the core ques¬
tions that were set out in its introduction:

1. In terms of definition, the term globalization reveals most about social
relations when it is understood as the spread of transplanetary (and in
contemporary times also increasingly supraterritorial) connections
between people.

2. In terms of chronology, accelerated and intense growth of transplanetary
and supraterritorial connectivity has mainly occurred over the past fifty
years.

3. In terms of causation, globalization can be explained in terms of a world-
systemic dynamic in which the expansion of transplanetary and suprater¬
ritorial spaces has interrelated with certain turns in capitalist production,
bureaucratic governance, identity politics, and rationalist knowledge.

4. In terms of social continuity and change, the past half-century of height¬
ened globalization has involved important reconfigurations of geogra¬
phy, economy, polity, identity and knowledge, albeit that territoriality,
older forms of capital, the state, the nation, and modern rationality still
figure crucially in contemporary life.

5. In terms of normative concerns, recent speedy growth of global relations
has, next to some important benefits, also significantly undermined
human security, social equality and democracy.

6. In terms of policy responses, a politics that combines ambitiously
reformist and cautiously transformist measures can substantially reduce
potential harms and greatly increase potential gains of heightened trans¬
planetary connectivity in the twenty-first century.

These general conclusions have important implications for social analysis.
Contemporary globalization has rendered methodological territorialism
obsolete. It is no longer possible to comprehend geography in terms of terri¬
torial spaces alone. Significant aspects of social relations now transcend terri¬
torial arenas. A post-territorialist conception of social geography goes hand
in hand with post-territorialist understandings of culture, ecology, econo¬
mics, politics and psychology. The major growth of transplanetary and
supraterritorial connectivity over the past fifty years requires that social
researchers henceforth pose their questions and develop their answers in a
different kind of spatial frame. In addition, researchers can - as attempted in


424



Conclusion 425


this book - use studies of globalization as an occasion to transcend discipli¬
nary divides and to reformulate general models of social explanation.

This book’s account of globalization also has significant implications for
political practice. Heightened levels of transplanetary connectivity have
rendered statist policy and nationalist citizenship of an earlier era obsolete.
Today every substantive issue-area - be it health, leisure, migration or
warfare - needs to be addressed through multi-scalar governance that
includes a notable transworld dimension. Correspondingly, to achieve a good
society in this more global world, the polity needs to be reconstructed in a
post-territorialist fashion, where citizen rights and responsibilities acquire
suprastate as well as state-bound qualities.

As seen in Chapters 6 and 7, some moves towards polycentric governance
and multidimensional citizenship have already transpired. However, it may
be hoped that books such as this one can help political consciousness and
practices to catch up with larger historical trends. Indeed, as stressed
throughout, this critical introduction has aimed to empower as well as
enlighten. The more people understand globalization, the more they can real¬
ize their potentials to shape it in their preferred directions. This book opened
with a concerned citizen’s frustrations that ‘we don’t know what globaliza¬
tion is, but we have to act!’ Hopefully the book now closes leaving the reader
with greater comprehension and greater capacity for informed and effective
action.



Bibliography


2B1 (2004) Website of the 2B1 Foundation, www.2bl.org, accessed on 22 October.

Abegglen, J. C. (1994) Sea Change: Pacific Asia as the New World Industrial Center. New York:
Free Press.

Abrahams, D. (2004) Regulating Corporations: A Resource Guide. Geneva: United Nations
Research Institute for Social Development.

Abramson, J. B. et al. (1988) The Electronic Commonwealth: The Impact of New Media
Technologies on Democratic Politics. New York: Basic Books.

Abu-Lughod, J. L. (1989) Before European Hegemony: The World System A.D. 1250-1350.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Abu-Lughod, L. (1989) ‘Bedouins, Cassettes and Technologies of Public Culture’, Middle East
Report, no. 159 (July-August), pp. 7-11.

Adam, B. D. (1987) The Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement. Boston, MA: Twayne.

Adam, B. D. et al. (eds) (1999) The Global Emergence of Gay and Lesbian Politics: National
Imprints of a Worldwide Movement. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

ADB (1999) Cooperation with Civil Society Organizations: Policy and Guidelines. Abidjan:
African Development Bank, October.

Adler, E. (2003) ‘Constructivism and International Relations’, in W. Carlsnaes et al. (eds),
Handbook of International Relations. London: Sage, pp. 95-118.

Aghion, P. and J. G. Williamson (1998) Growth, Inequality and Globalization. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Agnew, J. (1998) Geopolitics: Re-visioning World Politics. London: Routledge.

Ahvenainen, J. (1981) The Far Eastern Telegraphs: the History of Telegraphic Communications
between the Far East, Europe and America before the First World War. Helsinki:
Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia.

AI-LGBT (2005) Website of the Amnesty International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender
Network, www.ai-lgbt.org, accessed on 18 January.

Ake, C. (1999) ‘Globalization, Multilateralism and the Shrinking Democratic Space’, in M. G.
Schechter (ed.), Future Multilateralism: The Political and Social Framework. Tokyo: United
Nations University Press, pp. 179-95.

Akehurst, M. (1972-3) ‘Jurisdiction in International Law’, British Yearbook of International
Law, vol. 46, pp. 145-257.

Alber, J. and G. Standing (eds) (2000) ‘Social Dumping, Catch-up or Convergence? Europe in a
Comparative Global Context’, Journal of European Social Policy, vol. 10, no. 2 (May), pp.
99-119.

Albert, M. and L. Hilkermeier (eds) (2004) Observing World Politics: Niklas Luhmann and
International Relations. London: Routledge.

Albrow, M. (1996) The Global Age: State and Society Beyond Modernity. Cambridge: Polity
Press.

Aldecoa, F. and M. Keating (eds) (1999) Paradiplomacy in Action: The Foreign Relations of
Subnational Governments. London: Frank Cass.

Alexander, T. (1996) Unravelling Global Apartheid: An Overview of World Politics.
Cambridge: Polity Press.

Altman, D. (2001) Global Sex. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Amin, A. (ed.) (1994) Post-Fordism: A Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.

Amin, A. (1997) ‘Placing Globalization’, Theory, Culture and Society, vol. 14, no. 2 (May), pp.
123-38.

Amin, S. (1996) ‘The Challenge of Globalization’, Review of International Political Economy,
vol. 3, no. 2 (Summer), pp. 216-59.


426



Bibliography 427


Amin, S. (1997) Capitalism in the Age of Globalization. London: Zed.

Anaya, S.J. (1996) Indigenous Peoples in International Law. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Anderson, B. (1992) Long-Distance Nationalism: World Capitalism and the Rise of Identity
Politics. Amsterdam: Centre for Asian Studies Amsterdam.

Anderson, B. (2000) Doing the Dirty Work: The Global Politics of Domestic Labour. London:
Zed.

Anderson, J. (1996) ‘The Shifting Stage of Politics: New Medieval and Postmodern
Territorialities?’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, vol. 14, no. 2 (April), pp.
133-53.

Anderson, M. (1989) Policing the World: Interpol and the Politics of International Police Co¬
operation. Oxford: Clarendon.

Anderson, T. L. and D. R. Leal (1991) Free Market Environmentalism. Oxford: Westview.
Anderson, T. L. and D. R. Leal (1997) Enviro-Capitalists: Doing Good While Doing Well.
Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.

Anderson, W. T. (1990) Reality Isn’t What It Used To Be: Theatrical Politics, Ready-to-Wear
Religion, Global Myths, Primitive Chic, and Other Wonders of the Postmodern World. San
Francisco: Harper &amp; Row.

Andriof, J. and M. McIntosh (eds) (2001) Perspectives on Corporate Citizenship. Sheffield:
Greenleaf.

Anheier, H. et al, (eds) (2001) Global Civil Society 2001. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Aniol, W. (2002) Paradoksy globalizacji [‘Paradoxes of Globalization’]. Warsaw: Aspra.
Antrobus, P. (2004) The Global Women’s Movement: Origins, Issues and Strategies. London:
Zed.

AP (1999a) ‘Indonesians Living in Poverty Reach 130 Million’, Associated Press newswire, 15
January.

AP (1999b) ‘World Bank Estimates 200 Million “Newly Poor” ’, Associated Press newswire, 3
June.

Appadurai, A. (1990) ‘Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy’, Public
Culture, vol. 2, no. 3 (Spring), pp. 1-24.

Appadurai, A. (1996) Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Appiah, K. A. andH. L. Gates (eds) (1997) The Dictionary of Global Culture. New York: Knopf.
Araghi, F. A. (1995) ‘Global Depeasantization, 1945-1990’, The Sociological Quarterly, vol.
36, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 337-68.

Archer, M. (1990) ‘Foreword’, in M. Albrow and E. King (eds), Globalization, Knowledge and
Society: Readings from International Sociology. London: Sage, pp. 1-2.

Archibugi, D. (ed.) (2003) Debating Cosmopolitics. London: Verso.

Archibugi, D. et al. (eds) (1998) Re-imagining Political Community: Studies in Cosmopolitan
Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Arituwa, P. (2003) Author’s interview with the head of the Human Rights and Governance
Department, Uganda Joint Christian Council, Kampala, August.

Armijo, L.E. (ed.) (1999) Financial Globalization and Democracy in Emerging Markets.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Aronowitz, S. and W. DiFazio (1994) The Jobless Future: Sci-Tech and the Dogma of Work.

Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Aslanbeigui, N. et al. (eds) (1994) Women in the Age of Economic Transformation. Gender
Impact of Reforms in Post-Socialist and Developing Countries. London: Routledge.

Auge, M. (1992) Non-Places: Introduction to an Anthropology of Supermodernity. London:
Verso, 1995.

Auge, M. (1994) An Anthropology for Contemporaneous Worlds. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1999.

Aviat, A. and N. Coeurdacier (2004) ‘The Geography of Trade in Goods and Assets’. Paper for
the CESifo Venice Summer Institute Workshop on Dissecting Globalization, 21-22 July.



428 Bibliography


Axford, B. (1995) The Global System: Economics, Politics and Culture. Cambridge: Polity
Press.

Bacchetta, M. et al. (1998) Electronic Commerce and the Role of the WTO. Geneva: World
Trade Organization.

Badie, B. (1995) La fin des territories. Essai sur le desordre international et sur I’utilite social du
respect. Paris: Fayard.

Baer, J. B. and O. G. Saxon (1949) Commodity Exchanges and Futures Trading. New York:
Harper &amp; Brothers.

Baker, D. et al. (eds) (1998) Globalization and Progressive Economic Policy. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Balaam, D. N. andM. V. Veseth (2001) Introduction to International Political Economy. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2nd edn.

Balanya, B. et al. (2000) Europe Inc.: Regional and Global Restructuring and the Rise of
Corporate Power. London: Pluto.

Baldwin, R. E. and P. Martin (1999) ‘Two Waves of Globalization: Superficial Similarities,
Fundamental Differences’, in H. Siebert (ed.), Globalization and Labor. Tubingen: Mohr
Siebeck, pp. 3-58.

Balleroni, E. (1995) ‘Women To Be Given Priority’, Politiken Summit, 8 March, p. 7.

Bamyeh, M. (2000) The Ends of Globalization. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Bandow, D. and I. Vasquez (eds) (1994) Perpetuating Poverty: The World Bank, the IMF, and
the Developing World. Washington, DC: Cato Institute.

Barber, B. R. (1996) Jihad vs. McWorld. New York: Ballantine.

Barker, D. and J. Mander (n.d.) Invisible Government - the World Trade Organization: Global
Government for the New Millennium? San Francisco: International Forum on Globalization.

Barlow, M. and T. Clarke (2001) Global Showdown: How the New Activists Are Fighting
Global Corporate Rule. Toronto: Stoddart.

Barnet, R. J. and J. Cavanagh (1994) Global Dreams: Imperial Corporations and the New World
Order. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.

Barnett, M. (2005) ‘Social Constructivism’, in J. Baylis and S. Smith (eds), The Globalization of
World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 3rd edn, pp. 251-70.

Barnett, T. and A. Whiteside (2002) AIDS in the Twenty-First Century: Disease and
Globalization. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Barr, G. (2002) President of the Canadian Council for International Co-operation, in discussion
with the author, Ottawa, 2 May.

Bartlett, C. A. and S. Ghoshal (1998) Managing Across Borders: The Transnational Solution.
London: Random House Business Books, 2nd edn.

Basch, L. G. et al. (1994) Nations Unbound: Transnational Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments,
and Deterritorialized Nation-States. Langhorne, PA: Gordon &amp; Breach.

Bastian, J.-P. et al. (eds) (2001) La globalisation du religieux. Paris: Harmattan.

Bauman, Z. (1998) Globalization: The Human Consequences. Cambridge: Polity Press

Baylis, J. and S. Smith (eds) (2005) The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to
International Relations. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 3rd edn.

Bayne, N. (2000) Hanging in There: The G7 and G8 Summit in Maturity and Renewal.
Aldershot: Ashgate.

Beales, A. C. F. (1931) The History of Peace: A Short Account of the Organised Movements for
International Peace. London: Bell.

Beck, U. (1986) Risk Society: Toivards a New Modernity. London: Sage, 1992.

Beck, U. (1988) Ecological Politics in an Age of Risk. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1995.

Beck, U. (1994) ‘The Reinvention of Politics: Towards a Theory of Reflexive Modernization’, in
U. Beck et al.. Reflexive Modernization: Politics, Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern
Social Order. Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 1-55.

Beck, U. (1997) The Reinvention of Politics: Rethinking Modernity in the Global Social Order.
Cambridge: Polity Press.



Bibliography 429


Beck, U. (1999) World Risk Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Beetham, D. (1997) ‘Market Economy and Democratic Polity’, Democratization, vol. 4, no. 1
(Spring), pp. 76-93.

Bell, D. (1973) The Coming of Post-Industrial Society. London: Heinemann.

Bellamy Foster, J. (1994) ‘Waste Away’, Dollars &amp; Sense, no. 195 (September-October),
p. 7.

Bello, W. (2004) Deglobalization: Ideas for a New World Economy. London: Zed, 2nd edn.
Bello, W. et al. (1994) Dark Victory: The United States, Structural Adjustment, and Global
Poverty. London: Pluto.

Bendell, J. (2004) Barricades and Boardrooms: A Contemporary History of the Corporate
Accountability Movement. Geneva: United Nations Research Institute for Social
Development, Technology, Business and Society Programme Paper No. 13.

Benedick, R. E. (1998) Ozone Diplomacy: New Directions in Safeguarding the Planet.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, rev’d edn.

Beneria, L. and S. Feldman (eds) (1992) Unequal Burden: Economic Crises, Persistent Poverty,
and Women’s Work. Boulder, CO: Westview.

Bennett, A. (1999) ‘Hip Hop am Main: The Localization of Rap Music and Hip Hop Culture’,
Media, Culture &amp; Society, vol. 21, no. 1 (January), pp. 77-91.

Bentham, J. (1789) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. London:
Hafner, 1948.

Berdal, M. and M. Serrano (eds) (2002) Transnational Organized Crime and International
Security: Business as Usual? Boulder, CO: Rienner.

Berger, J. et al. (1998-9) ‘The Threat of Globalism’, Race &amp; Class, vol. 40, nos 2/3
(October-March).

Berger, P. (ed.) (1999) The Desecularization of the World: Resurgent Religion and World
Politics. Washington, DC: Eerdmans.

Berger, P. L. and S. P. Huntington (eds) (2002) Many Globalizations: Cultural Diversity in the
Contemporary World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bergsten, C. F. (1996) ‘Globalizing Free Trade’, Foreign Affairs, vol. 75, no. 3 (May/June), pp.
105-20.

Berkovitch, N. (1999) From Motherhood to Citizenship: Women’s Rights and International
Organizations. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Bernal, M. (1987) Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization. London: Free
Association Books.

Berry, A. (2002) ‘Globalization, Liberalization and Inequality: An Analysis with Focus on Data
Problems’. Paper presented at the UNRISD Conference on Improving Knowledge of Social
Development in International Organizations, Nyon, 30 May.

Beyer, P. (1994) Religion and Globalization. London: Sage.

Beynon, J. and D. Dunkerley (eds) (2000) Globalization: The Reader. London: Athlone.
Bhagwati, J. N. (ed.) (1977) The New International Economic Order: The North-South Debate.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bhagwati, J. N. (2004) In Defense of Globalization. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bhalla, S. S. (2002) Imagine There’s No Country: Poverty, Inequality, and Growth in the Era of
Globalization. Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.

Biel, R. (2000) The New Imperialism: Crisis and Contradictions in North-South Relations.
London: Zed.

Biermann, F. (2000) ‘The Case for a World Environment Organization’, Environment, vol. 42
(November), pp. 22-31.

Biersteker, T. J. and C. Weber (eds) (1996) State Sovereignty as Social Construct. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Bircham, E. and J. Charlton (eds) (2001) Anti-Capitalism: A Guide to the Movement. London:
Bookmarks.

BIS (1996) International Banking and Financial Market Developments. Basle: Bank for
International Settlements.



430 Bibliography


BIS (1997) Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. Basle: Bank for International
Settlements.

BIS (1998) 68 tl ’ Annual Report. Basle: Bank for International Settlements.

BIS (2000a) ‘Quarterly Review: International Banking and Financial Market Developments’, June.

BIS (2000b) 70 th Annual Report. Basle: Bank for International Settlements.

BIS (2001a) ‘Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in April
2001: Preliminary Global Data’, Bank for International Settlements press release, 9 October.

BIS (2001b) Quarterly Review, December 2001. Basle: Bank for International Settlements.

BIS (2001c) 71 st Annual Report. Basle: Bank for International Settlements.

BIS (2004) OTC Derivatives Market Activity in the Second Half of 2003. Basle: Bank for
International Settlements Monetary and Economic Department.

Blaney, D. and N. Inayatullah (1994) ‘Prelude to a Conversation of Cultures in International
Society? Todorov and Nandy on the Possibility of Dialogue’, Alternatives, vol. 19, no. 1
(Winter), pp. 23-51.

Bleeke, J. and D. Ernst (eds) (1993) Collaborating to Compete: Using Strategic Alliances and
Acquisitions in the Global Marketplace. New York: John Wiley.

Bleiker, R. (2000) Popular Dissent, Human Agency and Global Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Blinder, A. S. (1999) ‘Eight Steps to a New Financial Order’, Foreign Affairs, vol. 78, no. 5
(September-October), pp. 50-63.

Block, F. (2003) ‘Karl Polanyi and the Writing of The Great Transformation', Theory &amp; Society,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1-32.

Blustein, P. (2001) The Chastening: Inside the Crisis that Rocked the Global Financial System
and Humbled the IMF. Washington, DC: Public Affairs.

Boden, D. (1990) ‘Reinventing the Global Village: Communication and the Revolutions of
1989’, in A. Giddens (ed.), Human Societies: An Introductory Reader in Sociology.
Cambridge: Polity Press, 1992, pp. 327-31.

Bolger, A. (2004) ‘FT500: Insurance’, Financial Times, 27 May, p. 7.

Boli, J. (2006) ‘World Polity Theory’, in R. Robertson and J. A. Scholte (eds), Encyclopaedia of
Globalization. London: Routledge.

Boli, J. and G. M. Thomas (1999) Constructing World Culture: International Nongovernmental
Organizations since 1875. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Bond, P. and N. Bullard (1999) Their Reform and Ours: The Balance of Forces and Economic
Analysis that Inform a New Global Financial Architecture. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn
University Press.

Booth, K. (ed.) (1991) New Thinking about Strategy and International Security. London:
HarperCollins.

Booth, K. and T. Dunne (eds) (2002) Worlds in Collision: Terror and the Future of Global
Order. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bordo, M. D. et at. (1999) ‘Is Globalization Today Really Different than Globalization a
Hundred Years Ago?’, in S. M. Collins and R. Z. Lawrence (eds), Brookings Trade Forum
1999. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Born, G. B. (1996) International Civil Litigation in United States Courts: Commentary and
Materials. London: Kluwer Law International, 3rd edn.

Born, K. E. (1977) International Banking in the 19 tl} and 20 tl:l Centuries. Leamington Spa: Berg.

Boughton, J. (2001) Silent Revolution: The International Monetary Fund 1979-89.
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

Bouma, J. J. et al. (eds) (2001) Sustainable Banking: The Greening of Finance. Sheffield:
Greenleaf/Deloitte and Touche.

Bourdieu, P. (1998) Acts of Resistance: Against the New Myths of Our Time. Cambridge: Polity.

Bove, J. and F. Dufour (2001) The World Is Not for Sale: Farmers against Junk Food. London:
Verso.

Bowles, P. and B. Wagman (1997) ‘Globalization and the Welfare State: Four Hypotheses and
Some Empirical Evidence’, Eastern Economic Journal, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 317-36.



Bibliography 431


Boyer, R. and D. Drache (eds) (1996) States against Markets: The Limits of Globalization.
London: Routledge.

Boyle, E. H. (2002) Female Genital Cutting: Cultural Conflict in the Global Community.

Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Bradford, S. and R. Z. Lawrence (2004) Has Globalization Gone Far Enough? The Costs of
Fragmented Markets. Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.

Brand, U. et al. (2000) Global Governance. Alternative zur neoliberalen Globalisierung?
Munster: Westfalisches Dampfboot.

Bratton, W. W. et al. (eds) (1996) International Regulatory Competition and Coordination:
Perspectives on Economic Regulation in Europe and the United States. Oxford:
Clarendon.

Braudel, F. (1958) ‘History and the Social Sciences: The Longue Duree’ , in On History. London:
Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1980, pp. 25-54.

Braudel, F. (1979a) Civilization and Capitalism 15 th -18 th Century. Volume II: The Wheels of
Commerce. London: Collins, 1983.

Braudel, F. (1979b) Civilization and Capitalism 15 th -l 8 th Century. Volume III: The Perspective
of the World. London: Collins, 1984.

Brayton, S. (2002) ‘Outsourcing War: Mercenaries and the Privatization of Peacekeeping’,
Journal of International Affairs, vol. 55, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 303-29.

Brecher, J. and T. Costello (1994) Global Village or Global Pillage: Economic Reconstruction
from the Bottom Up. Boston, MA: South End Press.

Breidenbach, J. and I. Zukrigl (1998) Tanz der Kulturen. Kulturelle Identitat in einer global-
isierten Welt. Munich: Kunstmann.

Brenner, N. (1998) ‘Global Cities, Glocal States: Global City Formation and State Territorial
Restructuring in Contemporary Europe’, Review of International Political Economy, vol. 5,
no. 1 (Spring), pp. 1-37.

Brenner, N. (1999) ‘Beyond State-Centrism? Space, Territoriality, and Geographical Scale in
Globalization Studies’, Theory and Society, vol. 28, no. 1 (February), pp. 39-78.

Brenner, N. et al. (eds) (2003) State/Space: A Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.

Breslin, S. (2000) ‘Decentralisation, Globalisation and China’s Partial Re-engagement with the
Global Economy’, New Political Economy, vol. 5, no. 2 (July), pp. 205-26.

Breslin, S. and G. D. Hook (eds) (2002) Microregionalism and World Order. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Breslin, S. et al. (eds) (2002) New Regionalisms in the Global Political Economy: Theories and
Cases. London: Routledge.

Bretherton, C. and J. Vogler (1999) The European Union as a Global Actor. London:
Routledge.

Breton, G. and M. Lambert (eds) (2003) Universities and Globalization: Private Linkages,
Public Trust. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Broad, R. (ed.) (2002) Global Backlash: Citizen Initiatives for a Just World Economy. Lanham,
MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.

Brock, L. (1993) ‘Im Umbruch der Weltpolitik’, Leviathan, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 163-73.

Bromley, S. (1999) ‘Marxism and Globalisation’, in A. Gamble et al. (eds), Marxism and Social
Science. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 280-301.

Brotton, J. (1999) ‘Terrestrial Globalism: Mapping the Globe in Early Modern Europe’, in D.

Cosgrove (ed.), Mappings. London: Reaktion Books, pp. 71-89.

Brown, C. (2001) ‘Cosmopolitanism, World Citizenship and Global Civil Society’, Critical
Review of International Social and Political Philosophy, vol. 3, no. 1 (Summer), pp. 1-7.1.
Brown, D. M. and E. H. Fry (eds) (1993) States and Provinces in the International Economy.

Berkeley, CA: Institute of Governmental Studies Press, University of California.

Brown, L. D. et al. (2001) ‘Civil Society Legitimacy: A Discussion Guide’, in Brown (ed.),
Practice-Research Engagement and Civil Society in a Globalizing World. Cambridge, MA:
Hauser Center for Nonprofit Organizations, Harvard University.

Brown, N. (1990) New Strategy through Space. Leicester: Leicester University Press.



432 Bibliography


Brown, R. (1995) ‘Globalization and the End of the National Project’, in J. Macmillan and A.
Linklater (eds), Boundaries in Question: New Directions in International Relations. London:
Pinter, pp. 54-68.

Brown, T. (1999) ‘World Financial Crisis Not Over - UNICEF’s Bellamy’, Reuters despatch of
29 April.

Briihl, T. et al. (eds) (2001) Die Privatisierung der Weltpolitik. Entstaatlicbung und
Kommerzialisierung im Globalisierungsprozefi. Bonn: Dietz.

Brundtland, G. H. (2000) Address to the Annual Conference of the Academic Council of the
United Nations System, Oslo, 17 June.

Bryan, L. and D. Farrell (1996) Market Unbound: Unleashing Global Capitalism. New York:
John Wiley.

Bryant, C. G. A. and D. Jary (eds) (1991) Giddens’ Theory of Structuration: A Critical
Appreciation. London: Routledge.

Bryant, R. C. (1999) ‘Standards and Prudential Oversight for an Integrating World Financial
System’. Paper for a meeting of the Tokyo Club Foundation for Global Studies and the Royal
Institute of International Affairs.

Bryant, R. C. (2000) Turbulent Waters: Cross-Border Finance in the 21st Century. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution.

Brysk, A. (2000) From Tribal Village to Global Village: Indian Rights and International
Relations in Latin America. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Bryson, J. R. and P. W. Daniels (eds) (1998) Service Industries in the Global Economy, 2 vols.
Cheltenham: Elgar.

Brzezinski, Z. (1993) Out of Control: Global Turmoil on the Eve of the Twenty-First Century.
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.

BT (2000) Variety and Values: a Sustainable Response to Globalisation? London: British
Telecommunications Corporate Reputation &amp; Social Policy Unit.

Buchanan, P.J. (1998) The Great Betrayal: Flow American Sovereignty and Social Justice Are
Being Sacrificed to the Gods of the Global Economy. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.

Budge, I. (1996) The New Challenge of Direct Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Budhoo, D. L. (1990) Enough Is Enough. New York: Apex.

Buell, F. (1994) National Culture and the New Global System. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

Buira, A. (ed.) (2003) Challenges to the World Bank and IMF: Developing Country Perspectives.
London: Anthem.

Bull, H. (1977) The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Bunch, C. and N. Reilly (1994) Demanding Accountability: the Global Campaign and Vienna
Tribunal for Women s Human Rights. New York: Center for Women’s Global Leadership
and the United Nations Development Fund for Women.

Burbach, R. and K. Danaher (eds) (2000) Globalize This! The Battle against the World Trade
Organization and Corporate Rule. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press.

Burbach, R. and W. I. Robinson (1999) ‘The Fin de Siecle Debate: Globalization as Epochal
ShitC, Science and Society, vol. 63, no.1 (Spring), pp. 10-39.

Burbach, R. et al. (1997) Globalization and its Discontents: The Rise of Postmodern Socialisms.
London: Pluto.

Burchill, S. et al. (2005) Theories of International Relations. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan,
3rd edn.

Burki, S. J. and G. Perry (1998) Beyond the Washington Consensus: Institutions Matter.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Burnham, P. (1997) ‘Globalisation: States, Markets and Class Relations’, Historical
Materialism, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 150-60.

Burtless, G. etal. (1998) Globaphobia: Confronting Fears about Open Trade. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.

Burton, J.W. (1972) World Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



Bibliography 433


Cable, V. (1994) The World’s New Fissures: Identities in Crisis. London: Demos.

Cable, V. (1995) ‘The Diminished Nation-State: A Study in the Loss of Economic Power’,
Daedalus, vol. 124, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 23-54.

Cable, V. (1999) Globalization and Global Governance. London: Pinter.

Cairncross, F. (1997) The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution Will
Change Our Lives. London: Orion Business.

Calvocoressi, P. (1987) A Time for Peace: Pacifism, Internationalism and Protest Forces in the
Reduction of War. London: Hutchinson.

Cameron, R. and V. I. Bovykin (eds) (1991) International Banking 1870-1914. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Cameron, A. and R. Palan (2004) The Imagined Economies of Globalization. London: Sage.
Camilleri, J. A. and J. Falk (1992) The End of Sovereignty? The Politics of a Shrinking and
Fragmenting World. Aldershot: Elgar.

Camilleri, J. A. etal. (eds) (1995) TheState in Transition: Reimagining Political Space. Boulder,
CO: Rienner.

Campbell, D. (1998) Writing Security: United States Foreign Policy and the Politics of Identity.

Manchester: Manchester University Press, rev’d edn.

Campbell, D. and M. Dillon (eds) (1993) The Political Subject of Violence. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.

Campbell, T. (1987) The Earliest Printed Maps 1472-1500. London: British Library.
CapGemini (2004) World Wealth Report 2004, online at: www.us.capgemini.

com/DownloadLibrary/files/FSI_WorldWealthReport2004.pdf - accessed on 28 October.
Cardenas, S. (2003) ‘Emerging Global Actors: The United Nations and National Human Rights
Institutions’, Global Governance, vol. 9, no. 1 (January-March), pp. 23-42.

Cardoso, F. H. (1996) ‘La globalizacion y et nuevo orden mundial’, Boletln editorial de el
Colegio de Mexico, No. 68.

Carlsson, I. et at. (1995) Our Global Neighbourhood. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carneiro, S. (2002) Executive Coordinator of Geledes - Black Woman’s Institute, interviewed by
the author in Porto Alegre, Brazil, 1 February.

Carnoy, M. etal. (1993) TheNeiv Global Economy in the Information Age. University Park, PA:
Pennsylvania State University Press.

Carothers, T. (2000) ‘Struggling with Semi-Authoritarians’, in P. Burnell (ed.), Democracy
Assistance: International Co-operation for Democratization, London: Frank Cass, pp.
210-26.

Carter, A. (2001) The Political Theory of Global Citizenship. London: Routledge.

Castells, M. (1989) The Informational City: Information Technology, Economic Restructuring,
and the Urban-Regional Process. Oxford: Blackwell.

Castells, M. (1996-7) The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture. Oxford: Blackwell.
Castells, M. (2001) The Internet Galaxy: Reflections on the Internet, Business, and Society.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Castles, S. (2000) Ethnicity and Globalization: From Migrant Worker to Transnational Citizen.
London: Sage.

Castles, S. and A. Davidson (2000) Citizenship and Migration: Globalization and the Politics of
Belonging. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Castles, S. and M.J. Miller (1998) The Age of Migration: International Population Movements
in the Modern World. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2nd edn.

Cerny, P. G. (1990) The Changing Architecture of Politics: Structure, Agency and the Future of
the State. London: Sage.

Cerny, P. G. (1993) ‘Plurilateralism: Structural Differentiation and Functional Conflict in the
Post-Cold War World Order’, Millennium, vol. 22, no.l (Spring), pp. 27-51.

Cerny, P. G. (1996) ‘Globalization and Other Stories: the Search for a New Paradigm for
International Relations’, International Journal, vol. 51, no. 4 (Autumn), pp. 617-37.

Cerny, P. G. (1997) ‘Paradoxes of the Competition State: The Dynamics of Political
Globalization’, Government and Opposition, vol. 32, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 251-74.



434 Bibliography


Cervinski, G. (2004) Member of the National Council of the Movement of Dam-Affected
People, in discussion with the author in Brasilia, 20 November.

CFGS (2001) Rethinking Governance: An Inventory of Ideas to Enhance Participation,
Transparency and Accountability. Victoria, BC: University of Victoria Centre for Global
Studies.

Chambers, S. and W. Kymlicka (eds) (2002) Alternative Conceptions of Civil Society. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

Chandler, A. D. (1986) ‘The Evolution of Modern Global Competition’, in M. E. Porter (ed.),
Competition in Global Industries. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, pp. 405-48.
Chase-Dunn, C. K. (1989) Global Formation: Structures of the World Economy. Oxford:
Blackwell.

Cheah, P. and B. Robbins (eds) (1998) Cosmopolitics: Thinking and Feeling beyond the Nation.

Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Chesnaid, F. (1994) La mondialisation du capital. Paris: Syros.

Chesnais, F. et al. (eds) (2000) European Integration and Global Corporate Strategies. London:
Routledge.

Childers, E. (1994) ‘United Nations Reform: Relevance of the Southern Perspective’. Geneva:
International NGO Network on Global Governance and Democratization of International
Relations, Topical Papers 3.

CHIPS (2005) Website of the Clearing House Interbank Payment System www.chips.org,
accessed on 24 January.

Chomsky, N. (1998) Profits over People: Neoliberalism and the Global Order. New York: West
Group.

Chopra, J. and T. G. Weiss (1992) ‘Sovereignty Is No Longer Sacrosanct: Codifying
Humanitarian Intervention’, Ethics and International Affairs, vol. 6, pp. 95-117.
Chossudovsky, M. (1997) The Globalisation of Poverty: Impacts of IMF and World Bank
Reforms. London: Zed.

Chowdhry, G. and S. Nair (eds) (2002) Poiver, Postcolonialism, and International Relations:

Reading Race, Gender, and Class. London: Routledge.

CHS (2003) Human Security Now: Protecting and Empoivering People. New York:

Commission on Human Security. Also online at www.humansecurity-chs.org.

Cl (2005) Website of Consumers International: www.consumersinternational. org, accessed on
3 February.

CIA (2004) Website of the Computer Industry Almanac, www.c-i-a.com/, press release of 3
September, accessed on 28 October.

Cipolla, C. M. (1956) Money, Prices, and Civilization in the Mediterranean World: Fifth to
Seventeenth Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

CIPR (2002) Integrating Intellectual Property Rights and Development Policy. London:
Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, UK Department for International
Development.

Clapp, J. (1998) ‘The Privatization of Global Environmental Governance: ISO 14000 and the
Developing World’, Global Governance, vol. 4, no. 3 (July-September), pp. 295-316.
Clapp, J. (2002) ‘What the Pollution Havens Debate Overlooks’, Global Environmental Politics,
vol. 2, no. 2 (May), pp. 11-19.

Clark, I. (1997) Globalization and Fragmentation: International Relations in the Twentieth
Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Clark, I. (1999) Globalization and International Relations Theory. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Clark, J. D. (2001) ‘Ethical Globalization: the Dilemmas and Challenges of Internationalizing
Civil Society’, in M. Edwards and J. Gaventa (eds), Global Citizen Action. Boulder, CO:
Rienner, pp. 17-28.

Clark, J. D. (ed.) (2003) Globalizing Civic Engagement: Civil Society and Transnational Action.
London: Earthscan.

Clayton, M. and A. Williams (eds) (2000) The Ideal of Equality. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.



Bibliography 435


Clift, B. (2003) French Socialism in a Global Era. London: Continuum.

CLS (2004) ‘CLS Bank Settles New Record Value’, press release of 15 December, posted on the
website of the Continuous Linked Settlement Bank, www.cls-group.com/news, accessed on
21 January 2005.

Cockburn, A. and J. St. Clair (2000) Five Days that Shook the World: Seattle and Beyond.
London: Verso.

Cohen, B. J. (1977) Organizing the World’s Money: The Political Economy of International
Monetary Relations. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 1978.

Cohen, E. S. (2001) ‘Globalization and the Boundaries of the State: A Framework for Analyzing
the Changing Practice of Sovereignty’, Governance, vol. 14, no. 1 (January), pp. 75-97.
Cohen, J. L. and A. Arato (1992) Civil Society and PoliticalTheory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohen, R. (1997) Global Diasporas: An Introduction. London: UCL Press.

Cohen, R. and S.M. Rai (eds) (2000) Global Social Movements. London: Athlone Press.

Cohen, S. and J. Zysman (1987) Manufacturing Matters: The Myth of the Post-Industrial
Economy. New York: Basic Books.

Cohn, T. H. (2002) Governing Global Trade: International Institutions in Conflict and
Convergence. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Coker, C. (2001) Humane Warfare. London: Routledge.

Coleman, W. D. and G. R. D. Underhill (eds) (1998) Regionalism and Global Economic
Integration: Europe, Asia and the Americas. London: Routledge.

Collins, C. J. L. etal. (2001) ‘Jubilee 2000: Citizen Action across the North-South Divide’, in M.

Edwards and J. Gaventa (eds), Global Citizen Action. Boulder, CO: Rienner, pp. 135-48.
Commoner, B. (1971) The Closing Circle: Confronting the Environmental Crisis. London:
Cape, 1972.

Community Currencies (2005) Website www.ratical.org/many_worlds/cc/, accessed on 22
February.

Connolly, W. E. (1991) ‘Democracy and Territoriality’, Millennium, vol. 20, no. 3 (December),
pp. 463-84.

Connolly, W. E. (1995) The Ethos ofPluralization. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Connor, W. (1994) Ethnonationalism: The Quest for Understanding. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Coote, B. (1996) The Trade Trap: Poverty and the Global Commodity Markets. Oxford:
Oxfam, 2nd edn.

Cornia, G. A. et al. (1987-8) Adjustment with a Human Face, 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon.
Cornia, G. A. (ed.) (2004) Inequality, Growth, and Poverty in an Era of Liberalization and
Globalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Correa, C. M. (2000) Intellectual Property Rights, the WTO and Developing Countries: The
TRIPS Agreement and Policy Options. London/Penang: Zed/Third World Network.

Cox, K. R. (ed.) (1997) Spaces of Globalization: Reasserting the Power of the Local. New York:
Guilford.

Cox, R. W. (1987) Production, Power, and World Order: Social Forces in the Making of
History. New York: Columbia University Press.

Cox. R. W. (1997) ‘An Alternative Approach to Multilateralism for the Twenty-First Century’,
Global Governance, vol. 3, no. 1 (January-April), pp. 103-16.

Coyle, D. (2000) Governing the World Economy. Cambridge: Polity.

Craig, W. L. et al. (1998) International Chamber of Commerce Arbitration. Dobbs Ferry, NY:
Oceana Publications, 3rd edn.

Cram, L. et al. (eds) (1999) Developments in the European Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Creative Commons (2005) Website www.creativecommons.org, accessed on 9 March.

Crosby, A. (1972) The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492.
Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Cross, M. and R. Moore (eds) (2002) Globalization and the New City. New York: Palgrave.
Cruickshank, M. (1992) The Gay and Lesbian Liberation Movement. London: Routledge.



436 Bibliography


CSGR (2005) CSGR Globalisation Index, available on the website of the Centre for the Study of
Globalisation and Regionalization, www.csgr.org, accessed on 16 February.

Curtin, P. D. (1969) The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin
Press.

Cutler, A. C. et al. (eds) (1999) Private Authority in International Affairs. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.

Cvetkovich, A. and D. Kellner (eds) (1997) Articulating the Global and the Local: Globalization
and Cultural Studies. Boulder, CO: Westview.

Czempiel, E. -O. and J. N. Rosenau (eds) (1989) Global Changes and Theoretical Challenges.
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Dai, X. (2003) ‘A New Mode of Governance? Transnationalisation of European Regions and

Cities in the Information Age’, Telematics and Informatics, vol. 20, no. 3 (_), pp. 193-215.

Dalla Costa, M. and G. F. Dalla Costa (eds) (1993) Paying the Price: Women and the Politics of
International Economic Strategy. London: Zed.

Danaher, K. and J. Marks (2003) Insurrection: The Citizen Challenge to Corporate Power.
London: Routledge.

Daniel, D. C. and B. C. Hayes (eds) (1995) Beyond Traditional Peacekeeping. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Daston, L. (1999) ‘The Moralised Objectivities of Science’, in W. Carl and L. Daston (eds),
Wahrheit und Geschichte. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.

Dawson, M. C. (1999) ‘Globalization, the Racial Divide, and a New Citizenship’, in R. D. Torres
et al. (eds), Race, Identity, and Citizenship: A Reader. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 373-85.

De Cecco, M. (1974) Money and Empire: The International Gold Standard, 1890-1914.
Oxford: Blackwell.

Deacon, B. (1997) Global Social Policy: International Organizations and the Future of Welfare.
London: Sage.

Deacon, B. et al. (2003) Global Social Governance: Themes and Prospects. Helsinki: Globalism
and Social Policy Programme.

Deardorff, A. (2003) ‘What Might Globalization’s Critics Believe?’ World Economy, vol. 26, no.
5 (May), pp. 639-58.

Delanty, G. (2000) Citizenship in a Global Age: Society, Culture, Politics. Buckingham: Open
University Press.

Demac, D. A. (ed.) (1986) Tracing New Orbits: Cooperation and Competition in Global
Satellite Development. New York: Columbia University Press.

Denters, E. (1996) Law and Policy of IMF Conditionality. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Desmarais, A. A. (2002) ‘The Via Campesina: Consolidating an International Peasant and Farm
Movement ', Journal of Peasant Studies, vol. 29, no. 2 (January), pp. 91-124.

Devall, B. and G. Sessions (1985) Deep Ecology: Living as if Nature Mattered. Salt Lake City:
Smith.

Devine, J. (1996) NGOs: Changing Fashion or Fashioning Change? Bath: Centre for
Development Studies, University of Bath.

Dezalay, Y. and B. G. Garth (1996) Dealing in Virtue: International Commercial Arbitration
and the Construction of a Transnational Legal Order. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
DFID (1997) Eliminating World Poverty: A Challenge for the 21st Century. White Paper on
International Development. London: The Stationery Office/Cm 3789.

Dhonte, P. and I. Kapur (1997) Toward a Market Economy: Structures of Governance.
Washington, DC: IMF Working Paper 97/11.

Diamond, L. and M. F. Planner (eds) (1996) The Global Resurgence of Democracy. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2nd edn.

Dicken, P. (2003) Global Shift: Transforming the World Economy. London: Sage, 4th edn.
Dirlif, A. (1997) Postcolonial Aura: Third World Criticism in the Age of Global Capitalism.
Boulder, CO: Westview.

Doggart, C. (1993) Tax Havens and Their Uses, London: Economist Intelligence Unit.

Dollar, D. and A. Kraay (2000) Growth is Good for the Poor. Washington, DC: World Bank.



Bibliography 437


Doremus, P. N. et al. (1998) The Myth of the Global Corporation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Douglas, I. (1996) ‘The Myth of Globali[z]ation: A Poststructural Reading of Speed and
Reflexivity in the Governance of Late Modernity’. Paper presented at the 38th Annual
Convention of the International Studies Association, San Diego, April.

Dower, N. (2003) An Introduction to Global Citizenship. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.

Dower, N. and J. Williams (eds) (2002) Global Citizenship: A Critical Reader. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.

Dowmunt, T. (ed.) (1993) Channels of Resistance: Global Television and Local Empowerment.
London: BFI/Channel 4.

Drache, D. (ed.) (2001) The Market or the Public Domain? Global Governance and the
Assymmetry of Power. London: Routledge.

Drache, D. and M. Froese (2003) The Great Global Poverty Debate: Balancing Private Interests
and Public Good at the WTO. Toronto: Robarts Centre for Canadian Studies, York
University.

Drainville, A. C. (1998) ‘The Fetishism of Global Civil Society: Global Governance,
Transnational Urbanism and Sustainable Capitalism in the World Economy’, in M. P. Smith
and L. E. Guarnizo (eds), Transnationalism from Below. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction,
pp. 35-63.

Drori, G. S. (forthcoming) ‘United Nations’ Dedications: A World Culture in the Making?’
International Sociology.

Drori, G. S. et al. (2003) Science in the Modern World Polity: Institutionalization and
Globalization. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Drucker, P. F. (1989) The New Realities. London: Butterworth.

Drucker, P. F. (1993) Post-Capitalist Society. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.

Dryzek, J. S. (1999) ‘Transnational Democracy’, Journal of Political Philosophy, vol. 7, no. 1
(March), pp. 30-51.

Dubey, M. (1996) Ah Unequal Treaty: World Trading Order after GATT. New Delhi: New Age
International.

Duchacek, I. D. et al. (eds) (1988) Perforated Sovereignties and International Relations: Trans-
Sovereign Contacts of Subnational Governments. Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Duggan, P. and H. Dashner (eds) (1994) Women’s Lives in the New Global Economy.

Amsterdam: International Institute for Research and Education.

Dunn, J. (ed.) (1995) Contemporary Crisis of the Nation State? Oxford: Blackwell.

Dunne, T. and N. J. Wheeler (eds) (1999) Human Rights in Global Politics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Dunning, J. FI. (1993) The Globalization of Business: The Challenge of the 1990s. London,
Routledge.

Dunning, J. H. (1997) ‘The Advent of Alliance Capitalism’, in J. H. Dunning and K. A. Hamdani
(eds), The New Globalism and Developing Countries. Tokyo: United Nations University
Press, pp. 12-50.

Durbin, A. and C. Welch (2002) ‘The Environmental Movement and Global Finance’, in J. A.
Scholte with A. Schnabel (eds), Civil Society and Global Finance. London: Routledge, pp.
213-27.

Dyer-Witheford, N. (1999) Cyber-Marx: Cycles and Circuits of Struggle in High-Technology
Capitalism. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

Eade, J. (ed.) (1997) Living the Global City: Globalization as a Local Process. London: Routledge.
Eatwell, J. (2000) ‘From Cooperation to Coordination to Control?’ New Political Economy, vol.
4, no. 3 (November), pp. 410-15.

Eatwell, J. and L. Taylor (2000) Global Finance at Risk: The Case for International Regulation.
Cambridge: Polity.

Eckersley, R. (1992) Environmentalism and Political Theory: Toward an Ecocentric Approach.
London: University College London Press.



438 Bibliography


Edwards, M. (2000) NGO Rights and Responsibilities: A New Deal for Global Governance.
London: Foreign Policy Centre.

Edwards, M. (2004) Future Positive: International Co-operation in the 21st Century. London:
Earthscan, rev. edn.

Edwards, M. and J. Gaventa (eds) (2001) Global Citizen Action. Boulder, CO: Rienner.

Ehrenreich, B. and A. R. Hochschild (eds) (2002) Global Woman: Nannies, Maids, and Sex
Workers in the Netv Economy. New York: Metropolitan Books.

Eichengreen, B. et al. (1995) ‘Two Cases for Sand in the Wheels of International Finance’,
Economic Journal, vol. 105, no. 428 (January), pp. 162-72.

Eichengreen, B. (1999) Toward a Neiv International Financial Architecture: A Practical Post-
Asia Agenda. Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.

Einhorn, B. (1993) Cinderella Goes to Market: Citizenship, Gender and Women’s Movements
in East Central Europe. London: Verso.

Eisenstein, Z. R. (1998) Global Obscenities: Patriarchy, Capitalism, and the Lure of
Cyberfantasy. New York: New York University Press.

EIU (1957) A History of the London Metal Exchange. London: Economist Intelligence Unit.

Ekholm, K. and J. Friedman (1985) ‘Towards a Global Anthropology’, Critique of
Anthropology, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 97-119.

Elden, S. (2005) ‘Missing the Point: Globalization, Deterritorialization and the Space of the
World’, Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 8-19.

Elliott, L. and G. Cheeseman (eds.) (2004) Forces for Good: Cosmopolitan Militaries in the
Tiventy-First Century. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Elson, D. and R. Pearson (1981) ‘Nimble Fingers Make Cheap Workers: An Analysis of
Women’s Employment in Third World Export Manufacturing’, Feminist Review, no. 7
(Spring), pp. 87-107.

Embong, A. R. (2000) ‘Globalization and Transnational Class Relations: Some Problems of
Conceptualization’, Third World Quarterly, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 989-1000.

Emerson, R. (1960) From Empire to Nation: the Rise to Self-Assertion of Asian and African
Peoples. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1962.

Epstein, B. (2001) ‘Anarchism and the Anti-Globalization Movement’, Monthly Review, vol. 53,
no. 4, (September), pp.1-14.

Erie, S. P. (2004) Globalizing L.A.: Trade, Infrastructure, and Regional Development. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.

Eschle, C. and B. Maiguashca (2005) Critical Theories, International Relations and ‘the Anti-
Globalisation Movement’: The Politics of Global Resistance. London: Routledge.

Escorcia, G. (1999) Anecdote related to the author by the Director of Global Thinkers, Mexico
City, 8 June.

Esping-Andersen, G. (1990) The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Esping-Andersen, G. (1994) After the Golden Age: The Future of the Welfare State in the Neiv
Global Order. Geneva: UNRISD Occasional Paper 7, World Summit for Social
Development.

Esping-Andersen, G. (ed.) (1996) Welfare States in Transition: National Adaptations in Global
Economies. London: Sage.

Esposito, J. (ed.) (1990) The Iranian Revolution: Its Global Impact. Miami, FL: Florida
International University Press.

EST (1997) ‘The Economist Survey of Telecommunications’, The Economist, vol. 344, no. 8034
(13 September).

ETC (2004) Down on the Farm: The Impact of Nano-Scale Technologies on Food and
Agriculture. Ottawa: ETC Group , online at: www.etcgroup.org.

EU (1998) The Impact of Globalization on Statistics. Summary, Conclusion, Recommendations.
Brussels: European Commission, Globalization Reflection Group, 29 May.

Euroclear (2005) Website of Euroclear, www.euroclear.com, accessed on 3 February.

Europarl (2004) Website of the European Parliament, www.europarl.eu.mt, accessed on 2
November.



Bibliography 439


Evans, P. (1997) ‘The Eclipse of the State? Reflections on Stateness in an Era of Globalization’,
World Politics, vol. 50, no. 1 (October), pp. 62-87.

Everard, J. (1999) Virtual States: Globalization, Inequality and the Internet. London: Routledge.

Falk, R. A. (1992) Explorations at the Edge of Time: The Prospects for World Order.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Falk, R. A. (1993) ‘Global Apartheid’, Third World Resurgence, no. 37 (November), pp. 15-16.

Falk, R. A. (1995) On Humane Governance: Toward a Neiv Global Politics. Cambridge: Polity
Press.

Falk, R. A. (1999) Predatory Globalization: a Critique. Cambridge: Policy Press.

FAO (1998) The State of Food and Agriculture 1998. Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization.

FATF (2004) ‘Basic Facts about Money Laundering’, online at: wwwl.oecd.org/fatf/
Mlaundering_en.htm, accessed on 21 January.

Fawcett, L. and A. Hurrell (eds) (1995) Regionalism in World Politics: Regional Organization
and International Order. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Featherstone, M. (ed.) (1990) Global Culture: Nationalism, Globalization and Modernity.
London: Sage.

Featherstone, M. (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage.

Featherstone, M. et al. (eds) (2002) ‘Special Issue on Cosmopolis’, Theory, Culture and Society,
vol. 19, no. 1-2 (February-April).

Febvre, L. and L. J. Martin (1958) The Coming of the Book: The Impact of Printing 1450—1800.
London: Verso, 1984.

Fennema, M. (1982) International Netivorks of Banks and Industry. The Hague: Nijhoff.

Ferrer, A. (1997) Hechos y ficciones de la globalizacion [‘Facts and Fictions of Globalization’].
Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura Economica.

Findlay, T. (1995) ‘Armed Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution’, in SIPRI
Yearbook 1995. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 37-82.

Fine, R. (2003) ‘Taking the “Ism” out of Cosmopolitanism: An Essay in Reconstruction’,
European Journal of Social Theory, vol. 6, no. 4 (November), pp. 451-70.

Fisher, W. F. and T. Ponniah (eds) (2003) Another World is Possible: Popular Alternatives to
Globalization at the World Social Forum. London: Zed.

Fitzgerald, F. (2000) Way Out There in the Blue: Reagan, Star Wars and the End of the Cold
War. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.

Flora, C. B. (1990) ‘Rural Peoples in a Global Economy’, Rural Sociology, vol. 55, no. 2 (Spring),
pp. 157-77.

Florini, A. M. (ed.) (2000) The Third Force: The Rise of Transnational Civil Society.
Tokyo/Washington, DC: Japan Center for International Exchange/Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace.

Fontana, M. (2003) Modeling the Effects of Trade on Women at Work and at Home: A
Comparative Perspective. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute,
Macroeconomics Division, Discussion Paper No. 110, March.

Fortin, C. (1992) ‘The United Nations and Development in the 1990s’, in P. Streeten et al.,
International Governance. Brighton: University of Sussex, pp. 69-95.

Fortune (1995) ‘The Merger Mania Continues’, Fortune, vol. 132 (25 December), pp. 33-40.

Foster, J. W. with A. Anand (eds) (1999) Whose World Is It Anyway ? Civil Society, the United
Nations and the Multilateral Future. Ottawa: United Nations Association in Canada.

Foster, R. J. (1991) ‘Making National Cultures in the Global Ecumene’, Annual Review of
Anthropology, vol. 20, pp. 235-60.

Foucault, M. (1966) The Order of Things. London: Tavistock, 1970.

Fowler, A. (1994) ‘Capacity Building and NGOs: A Case of Strengthening Ladles for the Global
Soup Kitchen?’ Institutional Development, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 18-25.

Fox, J. A. and L. D. Brown (eds) (1998) The Struggle for Accountability: The World Bank,
NGOs and Grassroots Movements. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.



440 Bibliography


FPIF (2002) ‘Globalization and Militarization’, Foreign Policy in Focus, 5 February, online at:
www.fpif.org/briefs/vol7/v7nlmilglob.html.

Franda, M. (2001) Governing the Internet: The Emergence of cm International Regime. Boulder,
CO: Rienner.

Frankel, J. A. (ed.) (1998) The Regionalization of the World Economy. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Frederick, FI. (1993) ‘Computer Networks and the Emergence of Global Civil Society’, in L.
Harasim (ed.), Global Networks: Computers and International Communication.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 283-95.

French, H. (2000) Vanishing Borders: Protecting the Planet in the Age of Globalization.

Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute.

Friedman, J. (1994) Cultural Identity and Global Process. London: Sage.

Friedrichs, J. (2001) ‘The Meaning of New Medievalism’, European Journal of International
Relations, vol. 7, no. 4 (December), pp. 475-502.

Fry, E. H. (1995) ‘The Vincibility of Modern Nation-States: Challenges from the International
and Subnational Arenas’. Paper presented to the 36th Annual Convention of the
International Studies Association, Chicago, 21-25 February.

Fry, E. H. (1998) The Expanding Role of State and Local Governments in U.S. Foreign Affairs.
New York: Council on Foreign Relations Press.

Fry, E. H. (2006) ‘Substate Governance’, in R. Robertson and J. A. Scholte (eds), The
Encyclopedia of Globalization. London: Routledge.

FSF (1999) Website of the Financial Stability Forum: http://www.fsforum.org.

FT500 (1997) ‘The FT500 Survey’, Financial Times Supplement, 24 January.

Fuentes, A. and B. Ehrenreich (1983) Women in the Global Factory. Boston, MA: South End.
Fukuyama, F. (1992) The End of History and the Last Man. London: Hamish Hamilton.

Funk, N. and M. Mueller (eds) (1993) Gender Politics and Post-Communism: Reflections from
Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union. New York: Routledge.

Fustukian, S. et al. (2002) ‘Workers’ Health and Safety in a Globalising World’, in K. Lee et al.
(eds). Health Policy in a Globalising World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
208-28.

G8 (2004) Websites of the G8 Information Centre, http://www.g8.utoronto.ca, and G8 Online,
http://www.g8online.org, accessed on 10 January.

GACGC (1995) World in Transition: the Threat to Soils. 1994 Annual Report. Bonn:

Economica [German Advisory Council on Global Change],

Galizia, M. (1993) Personal communication to the author from Michele Galizia of the University
of Berne, July.

Gamble, A. (1994) The Free Economy and the Strong State: The Politics of Thatcherism.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Gamble, A. (2001) ‘Neo-Liberalism’, Capital and Class, vol. 75 (Autumn), pp. 127-34.
Gamble, A. and A. Payne (eds) (1996) Regionalism and World Order. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Gamble, C. (1994) Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Civilization. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Garret, L. (1994) The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out of Balance.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.

Garrett, G. (1998) Partisan Politics in the Global Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Garrett, G. (2001) ‘Globalization and Government Spending around the World’, Studies in
Comparative International Development, vol. 35, no. 4 (Winter), pp. 3-29.

Gates, B. (1995) The Road Ahead. London: Viking.

Gaventa, J. (1999) ‘Learning across Boundaries: Strengthening Participation in North and
South’. Paper presented at the Third International NGO Conference, University of
Birmingham, 10-13 January.

Gay, P. (1966) The Enlightenment: An Interpretation. New York: Knopf.



Bibliography 441


Gelber, H. G. (1997) Sovereignty through Interdependence. London: Kluwer Law International.
Gelernter, D. H. (1995) 1939: The Lost World of the Fair. New York: Free Press.

George, S. and F. Sabelli (1994) Faith and Credit: the World Bank’s Secular Empire. Boulder,
CO: Westview.

Gereffi, G. and M. Korzeniewicz (eds) (1994) Commodity Chains and Global Capitalism.
Westport, CN: Praeger.

Germain, R. (ed.) (1999) Globalization and Its Critics: Perspectives from Political Economy.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Germain, R. D. and M. Kenny (eds) (2005) The Idea of Global Civil Society: Politics and Ethics
in a Globalizing Era. London: Routledge.

Geyer, M. and C. Bright (1995) ‘World History in a Global Age’, American Historical Review,
vol. 100, no. 4 (October), pp. 1034-60.

Geyer, R. (1998) ‘Globalisation and the (Non-) Defence of the Welfare State’, West European
Politics, vol. 21, no. 3 (July), pp. 77-102.

Geyer, R. etal. (eds) (2000) Globalization, Europeanization, and the End of Scandinavian Social
Democracy? Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Ghai, D. (1994) ‘Structural Adjustment, Global Integration and Social Democracy’, in R.
Prendergast and F. Stewart (eds), Market Forces and World Development. New York: St.
Martin’s, pp. 15-44.

Ghai, D. (ed.) (1991) The IMF and the South: The Social Impact of Adjustment. London: Zed.
Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration.
Cambridge: Polity.

Giddens, A. (1990) The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity.

Giddens, A. (1991) Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age.
Cambridge: Polity Press.

Giddens, A. (1994) ‘Living in a Post-Traditional Society’, in U. Beck et al.. Reflexive
Modernization: Politics, Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern Social Order. Cambridge:
Polity Press, pp. 56-109.

Giddens, A. (1996) ‘On Globalization’, excerpts from a keynote address at the UNRISD
Conference on Globalization and Citizenship, 1 December 1996, online at: www.unrisd.org
(under ‘viewpoints’).

Giddens, A. (1998) The Third Way: the Renewal of Social Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (2002) Runaway World: How Globalisation is Reshaping our Lives. London:
Profile, 2nd edn.

Gilbert, A. (1999) Must Global Politics Constrain Democracy? Great-Power Realism,
Democratic Peace, and Democratic Internationalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.

Gilbert, E. and E. Helleiner (eds) (1999) Nation-States and Money: The Past, Present and Future
of National Currencies. London: Routledge.

Gill, S. (ed.) (1993) Gramsci, Historical Materialism and International Relations. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Gill, S. (1995a) ‘Globalisation, Market Civilisation, and Disciplinary Neoliberalism’,
Millennium, vol. 24, no. 3 (Winter), pp. 399-423.

Gill, S. (1995b) ‘Theorizing the Interregnum: The Double Movement and Global Politics in the
1990s’, inB. Hettne (ed.), International Political Economy: Understanding Global Disorder.
London: Zed, pp. 65-99.

Gill, S. (1996) ‘Globalization, Democratization, and the Politics of Indifference’, in J. H.

Mittelman (ed.), Globalization: Critical Reflections Boulder: Rienner, pp. 205-28.

Gill, S. (ed.) (1997) Globalization, Democratization and Multilateralism. London:
Macmillan/United Nations University Press.

Gills, B. (ed.) (1997) ‘Special Issue: Globalisation and the Politics of Resistance’, Neiv Political
Economy, vol. 2, no. 1 (March).

Gills, B. et al. (eds) (1993) Loiv Intensity Democracy: Political Power in the Neiv World Order.
London: Pluto.



442 Bibliography


Gilpin, R. (2001) Global Political Economy: Understanding the International Economic Order.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gilroy, B. M. (1993) Networking in Multinational Enterprises: The Importance of Strategic
Alliances. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.

Gilson, J. (2002) Asia Meets Europe. Cheltenham: Elgar.

Girvan, N. (2000) ‘A Perspective from the South’, New Political Economy, vol. 4, no. 3
(November), pp. 415-19.

Giulianotti, R. (1999) Football: A Sociology of the Global Game. Cambridge: Polity.

Glasius, M. et al. (eds) (2002) Global Civil Society 2002. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Glick Schiller, N. and G. E. Fouron (1999) ‘Terrains of Blood and Nation: Haitian Transnational
Social Fields’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, vol. 22, no. 2 (March), pp. 340-66.

Glick Schiller, N. and G. E. Fouron (2001) Georges Woke Up Laughing: Long-Distance
Nationalism and the Search for Home. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Global Compendium (2005) Online resource of the Globalization and Autonomy Project,
www.strange.mcmaster.ca/home_en.html, accessed on 23 January.

Global Reach (2004a) ‘Global Internet Statistics (by Language)’, online at:

www.glreach.com/globstats/, accessed on 22 October.

Global Reach (2004b) ‘Worldwide eCommerce Growth’, online at: www.glreach.com/
eng/ed/art/2004.ecommerce.php3, accessed on 22 October.

Goede, M. de (2001) ‘Discourses of Scientific Finance and the Failure of Long-Term Capital
Management’, New Political Economy, vol. 6, no. 2 (July), pp. 149-70.

Goldin, I. et al. (1993) Trade Liberalisation: Global Economic Implications. Paris:
OECD/World Bank.

Golding, P. and P. Harris (eds) (1997) Beyond Cultural Imperialism: Globalization,
Communication and the New International Order. London: Sage.

Golshani, M. (ed.) (2004) Can Science Dispense with Religioni Tehran: Institute for Humanities
and Cultural Studies, 3rd edn.

Gomez, J. (2000) Politica e democracia em tempos de globalizagao [‘Politics and Democracy in
the Time of Globalization’]. Petropolis: Editora Vozes.

Goodman, D. S. G. and G. Segal (eds) (1994) China Deconstructs: Politics, Trade and
Regionalism. London: Routledge.

Goodman, J. (2000) ‘Stopping a Juggernaut: The Anti-MAI Campaign’, in J. Goodman and P.

Ranald (eds), Stopping the Juggernaut. Annandale, NSW: Pluto Press, pp. 33-52.

Google (2005) Website of Google Web Search: www.google.com, accessed on 4 May.
Gorbachev Foundation (2003) Facets of Globalization: Difficult Issues of Contemporary
Development. Moscow: Alpina [in Russian with summary in English].

Gore, C. (2000) ‘The Rise and Fall of the Washington Consensus as a Paradigm for Developing
Countries’, World Development, vol. 28, no. 5 (May), pp. 789-804.

Gorz, A. (1988) Critique of Economic Reason. London: Verso, 1989.

Gottman, J. (1973) The Significance of Territory. Charlottesville: University Press of
Virginia.

Gowan, P. (1999) The Global Gamble: Washington’s Faustian Bid for World Dominance.
London: Verso.

Graeber, D. (2002) ‘The New Anarchists’, New Left Review, vol. 13 (January-February), pp.
61-73.

Gray, J. (1998) False Dawn: The Delusions of Global Capitalism. London: Granta.

Gray, J. (2001) ‘The Era of Globalisation Is Over’, New Statesman, vol. 30, issue 4556, 24
September, pp. 25-7.

Graz, J.C. (2003) ‘How Powerful Are Transnational Elite Clubs? The Social Myth of the World
Economic Forum’, New Political Economy, vol. 8, no. 3 (November), pp. 321-40.

Greer, J. and K. Bruno (1996) Greenwash: The Reality behind Corporate Environmentalism.
Penang: Third World Network.

Gregory, D. and J. Urry (eds) (1985) Social Relations and Spatial Structures. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.



Bibliography 443


Greider, W. (1997) One World, Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global Capitalism. London:
Allen Lane.

Griffith-Jones, S. (1998) Global Capital Flows: Should They Be Regulated? New York: St
Martin’s.

Group of Lisbon (1994) Limits to Competition, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
Grzybowski, C. (2004) Director of the Brazilian Institute of Social and Economic Analysis
(IBASE), in discussion with the author, Rio de Janeiro, 17 November.

Guehenno, J.-M. (1995) The End of the Nation-State. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Guidry, J. A. et al. (2000) Globalization and Social Movements: Culture, Poiver, and the
Transnational Public Sphere. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Gunaratna, R. (2002) Inside Al Qaeda: Global Network of Terror. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Gunter, B. G. (1996) ‘Reforming the International Monetary System towards a World Central
Bank: A Summary of Proposals and Fallacies’, in J. M. Griesgraber and B.G. Gunter (eds),
The World’s Monetary System: Toward Stability and Sustainability in the Twenty-First
Century. London: Pluto, pp. 115-35.

Gurr, T. R. (1994) ‘Peoples against States: Ethnopolitical Conflict and the Changing World
System’, International Studies Quarterly, vol. 38, no. 3 (September), pp. 347-77.

Gurr, T. R. (2000) ‘Ethnic Warfare on the Wane’, Foreign Affairs, vol. 79, no. 3 (May-June), pp.
52-64.

Haas, P. M. (1992) ‘Introduction: Epistemic Communities and International Policy
Coordination’, International Organization, vol. 46, no. 1 (Winter), pp. 1-35.

Haas, P.M. et al. (eds) (1993) Institutions for the Earth: Sources of Effective International
Environmental Protection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Habermas, J. (1998) The Postnational Constellation. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2001.
HABITAT (2003) The Challenge of Slums: Global Report on Human Settlements 2003.

London: Earthscan/United Nations Human Settlements Programme.

Hajnal, P. I. (1999) The G7/G8 System: Evolution, Role and Documentation. Aldershot:
Ashgate.

Hajnal, P. I. (2002) ‘Oxfam International’, in P. I. Hajnal (ed.), Civil Society in the Information
Age. Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 57-66.

Haley, M. A. (1999) ‘Emerging Market Makers: The Power of Institutional Investors’, in L. E.
Armijo (ed.), Financial Globalization and Democracy in Emerging Markets. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 74-90.

Halifax Initiative (2004) Who’s Minding the Store ? Legislator Oversight of the Bretton Woods
Institutions. Ottawa: Halifax Initiative, online at: www.halifaxinitiative.org, accessed on 31
October.

Hall, R. B and T. J. Biersteker (eds) (2003) The Emergence of Private Authority in Global
Governance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Halperin, M. H. and D. J. Scheffer (1992) Self-Determination in the Neiv World Order.

Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

Hamelink, C. J. (1983) Cultural Autonomy in Global Communications. New York: Longmans.
Hampton, M. (1996) The Offshore Interface: Tax Havens in the Global Economy. Basingstoke:
Macmillan.

Hampton, M. P. and J. P. Abbott (eds) (1999) Offshore Finance Centres and Tax Havens: The
Rise of Global Capital. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hanawat, B. A. and M. Kobialka (eds) (2000) Medieval Practices of Space. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.

Hancock, D. (1995) Citizens of the World: London Merchants and the Integration of the British
Atlantic Community, 1735-1785. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Handley, S. (ed.) (2001) The Links Effect: A Good Practice Guide to Transnational Partnerships
and Twinning of Local Authorities. London: Local Government International Bureau.
Handy, C. (1992) ‘Balancing Corporate Power: a New Federalist Paper’, Harvard Business
Review, vol. 70, no. 6 (November-December), pp. 59-72.



444 Bibliography


Hannerz, U. (1987) ‘The World in Creolisation’, Africa , vol. 57, pp. 546-59.

Hannerz, U. (1992) Cultural Complexity: Studies in the Social Organization of Meaning. New
York: Columbia University Press.

Hannerz, U. (1996) Transnational Connections: Culture, People, Places. London: Routledge.
Haq, M. ul et al. (eds) (1996) The Tobin Tax: Coping with Financial Volatility. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Harcourt, W. (ed.) (1999) Women @ Internet: Creating New Cultures in Cyberspace. London: Zed.
Harding, S. (1998) Is Science Multicultural ? Postcolonialisms, Feminisms, and Epistemologies.

Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Hardt, M. and A. Negri (2000) Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Harris, J. (1998-9) ‘Globalisation and the Transformation of Capitalism’, Race &amp; Class , vol. 40,
no. 2/3 (October-March), pp. 21-35.

Harrod, J. (1992) Labour and Third World Debt. Brussels: International Federation of
Chemical, Energy and General Workers’ Unions.

Harrod, J. and R. O’Brien (eds) (2002) Global Unions ? Theory and Strategy of Organised
Labour in the Global Political Economy. London: Routledge.

Harvey, D. (1989) The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Conditions of Cultural
Change. Oxford: Blackwell.

Harvey, D. (1993) ‘From Space to Place and Back Again: Reflections on the Condition of
Postmodernity’, in J. Bird et al. (eds), Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global Change.
London: Routledge, pp. 3-29.

Harvey, D. (2000) Spaces of Hope. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

Harvey, R. (1995) The Return of the Strong: The Drift to Global Disorder. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Haufler, V. (2001) The Public Role for the Private Sector: Industry Self-Regulation in a Global
Economy. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

Hawkesworth, M. (2003) ‘Global Containment: The Production of Feminist Invisibility and the
Vanishing Horizon of Justice’, in M. B. Steger (ed.), Rethinking Globalism. Lanham, MD:
Rowman &amp; Littlefield, pp. 51-65.

Hawthorne, N. (1851) The House of the Seven Gables: A Romance. Edinburgh: Paterson, 1883.
HDR (1991) Human Development Report 1991. New York: Oxford University Press.

HDR (1994) Human Development Report 1994. New York: Oxford University Press.

HDR (1995) Human Development Report 1995. New York: Oxford University Press.

HDR (1996) Human Development Report 1996. New York: Oxford University Press.

HDR (1997) Human Development Report 1997. New York: Oxford University Press.

HDR (1999) Human Development Report 1999. New York: Oxford University Press.

HDR (2003) Human Development Report 2003. New York: Oxford University Press.

Heater, D. (2002) World Citizenship: Cosmopolitan Thinking and its Opponents. London:
Continuum.

Hedetoft, U. and M. Hjort (eds) (2002) The Postnational Self: Belonging and Identity.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Heerings, H. and I. Zeldenrust (1995) Elusive Saviours: Transnational Corporations and
Sustainable Development. Utrecht: International Books.

Heidegger, M. (1950) ‘The Thing’, in Poetry, Language, Thought. New York: Harper &amp; Row,
1971, pp. 165-82.

Heidel, W. A. (1937) The Frame of the Ancient Greek Maps, With a Discussion of the Discovery of
the Sphericity of the Earth. New York: American Geographical Society, Research Series No. 20.
Heinrichsohn, E. (2000) World State, World Citizenship: How a New Consciousness Can Save
the World from Self-Destruction. New York: Fouque.

Held, D. (1995a) Democracy and the Global Order: From the Modern State to Cosmopolitan
Governance. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Held, D. (1995b) ‘Democracy and the New International Order’, in D. Archibugi and D. Held
(eds), Cosmopolitan Democracy: An Agenda for a New World Order. Cambridge: Polity
Press, pp. 96-120.



Bibliography 445


Held, D. (2004) Global Covenant: The Social Democratic Alternative to the Washington
Consensus. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Held, D. and A. McGrew (1993) ‘Globalization and the Liberal Democratic State’, Government
and Opposition, vol. 28, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 261-85.

Held, D. and A. McGrew (eds) (2002) Governing Globalization: Power, Authority and Global
Governance. Cambridge: Polity.

Held, D. and A. McGrew (2003) The Global Transformations Reader: An Introduction to the
Globalization Debate. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Held, D. and M. Koenig-Archibugi (eds) (2003) Taming Globalization: Frontiers of
Governance. Cambridge: Polity.

Held, D. et al. (1999) Global Transformations: Politics, Economics and Culture. Cambridge:
Polity.

Helleiner, E. (1994) States and the Reemergence of Global Finance: From Bretton Woods to the
1990s. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Helleiner, E. (1998) ‘Electronic Money: a Challenge to the Sovereign State?’ Journal of
International Affairs, vol. 51, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 387-410.

Helleiner, E. (1999) ‘Sovereignty, Territoriality, and the Globalization of Finance’, in D. A.
Smith et al. (eds), States and Sovereignty in the Global Economy. London: Routledge, pp.
138-57.

Helliwell, J. F. (1998) How Much Do National Borders Matter? Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution.

Helliwell, J. F. (2000) Globalization: Myths, Facts and Consequences. Toronto: C.D. Howe
Institute.

Henderson, D. (1999) The MAI Affair: A Story and its Lessons. London: Royal Institute of
International Affairs.

Herbst, J. and A. Olukoshi (1994) ‘Nigeria: Economic and Political Reforms at Cross Purposes’,
in S. Haggard and S. B. Webb (eds), Voting for Reform: Democracy, Political Liberalization,
and Economic Adjustment. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 453-502.

Herman, B. (2002) ‘Civil Society and the Financing for Development Initiative at the United
Nations’, in J. A. Scholte with A. Schnabel (eds), Civil Society and Global Finance. London:
Routledge, pp. 162-77.

Herman, E. S. and R. W. McChesney (1997) The Global Media: The New Missionaries of
Corporate Capitalism. London: Cassell.

Hermet, G. et al. (2005) La gouvernance. Un concept et ses applications. Paris: Karthala.
Herod, A. et al. (eds) (1998) An Unruly World? Globalization, Governance and Geography.
London: Routledge.

Hertz, N. (2001) The Silent Takeover: Global Capitalism and the Death of Democracy. London:
Heinemann.

Hettne, B. (1994) ‘The Regional Factor in the Formation of a New World Order’, in Y. Sakamoto
(ed.), Global Transformation: Challenges to the State System. Tokyo: United Nations
University Press, pp. 134-66.

Hettne, B. et al. (eds) (1999) Globalism and the New Regionalism. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Hettne, B. etal. (eds) (2000) The New Regionalism and the Future of Security and Development.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hettne, B. et al. (eds) (2001) Comparing Regionalisms: Implications for Global Development.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hewison, K. (1999) Localism in Thailand: A Study of Globalisation and its Discontents.
Coventry: ESRC/University of Warwick Centre for the Study of Globalisation and
Regionalisation, Working Paper No. 39/99.

Heyzer, N. et al. (eds) (1994) The Trade in Domestic Workers: Causes, Mechanisms and
Consequences of International Migration. London: Zed.

Higgott, R. A. (2000) ‘Contested Globalization: The Changing Context and Normative
Challenges’, Review of International Studies, vol. 26, no. 5 (December), pp. 131-53.



446 Bibliography


Higgott, R. A. and A. Payne (eds) (2000) The New Political Economy of Globalization.
Cheltenham: Elgar.

Hilferding, R. (1910) Finance Capital: A Study of the Latest Phase of Capitalist Development.
London: Routledge, 1981.

Hill, K. A. and J. E. Hughes (1998) Cyberpolitics: Citizen Activism in the Age of the Internet.
Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.

Hines, C. (2000) Localization: A Global Manifesto. London: Earthscan.

Hinsley, F. H. (1963) Power and the Pursuit of Peace: Theory and Practice in the History of
Relations between States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hironaka, A. (2004) Neverending Wars: Weak States, the International Community, and the
Perpetuation of Civil War. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Hirst, P. and G. Thompson (1996) ‘Globalisation: Ten Frequently Asked Questions and Some
Surprising Answers’, Soundings, vol. 4 (Autumn), pp. 47-66.

Hirst, P. and G. Thompson (1999) Globalization in Question: The International Economy and
the Possibilities of Governance. Cambridge: Polity, 2nd edn.

Hix, S. (1999) The Political System of the European Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hochschild, A. R. (2000) ‘Global Care Chains and Emotional Surplus Value’, in W. Hutton and
A. Giddens (eds), On the Edge: Living with Global Capitalism. London: Cape, pp. 130-46.

Hocking, B. (1993) Localizing Foreign Policy: Non-Central Governments and Multilayered
Diplomacy. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hodges, M. et al. (eds) (1999) The G8’s Role in the New Millennium. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Hoekman, B. M. and M. M. Kostecki (1995) The Political Economy of the World Trading
System: From GATT to WTO. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hoeven, R. van der (2002) personal communication to the author, Nyon, 30 May.

Holcombe, S. H. (1995) Managing to Empower: The Grameen Bank’s Experience of Poverty
Alleviation. London: Zed.

Holden, B. (ed.) (2000) Global Democracy: Key Debates. London: Routledge.

Holm, H. H. and G. Sorensen (1995) ‘International Relations Theory in a World of Variation’,
in Whose World Order? Uneven Globalization and the End of the Cold War. Boulder, CO:
Westview, pp. 187-206.

Holstein W. J. et al. (1990) ‘The Stateless Corporation’, Business Week, 14 May, pp. 52-9.

Holthoon, F. van and M. van der Linden (eds) (1988) Internationalism in the Labour Movement
1830-1940. Leiden: Brill.

HomeNet (1999) ‘Using the ILO Convention on Home Work’. Leeds: HomeNet International
(homenet@gn.apc.org).

Honeygold, D. (1989) International Financial Markets. Cambridge: Woodhead-Faulkner.

Hoogvelt, A. (2001) Globalisation and the Postcolonial World: The New Political Economy of
Development. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2nd edn.

Hook, G. and I. Kearns (eds) (1999) Subregionalism and World Order. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Hopkins, D. et al. (eds) (2001) Religions/Globalizations: Theories and Cases. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.

Hopkins, M. (1999) The Planetary Bargain: Corporate Social Responsibility Comes of Age.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Horsman, M. and A. Marshall (1994) After the Nation-State: Citizens, Tribalism and the New
World Disorder. London: HarperCollins.

Hout, W. and J. Grugel (eds) (1999) Regionalism across the North/South Divide: State Strategies
and Globalization. London: Routledge.

Houtart, F. and F. Polet (2001) The Other Davos: The Globalization of Resistance to the World
Economic System. London: Zed.

Hovden, E. and E. Keene (eds) (2002) The Globalization of Liberalism. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Hudson, Y. (ed.) (1999) Globalism and the Obsolescence of the State. Lewiston, NY: Mellen
Press.



Bibliography 447


Hughes, C.W. (2005) ‘Japan, East Asian Regionalization and Selective Resistance to
Globalization: Regional Divisions of Labour and Financial Cooperation’, in R. Stubbs and
G. R. D. Underhill (eds), Political Economy and the Changing Global Order. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 3rd edn.

Hume, D. (1741-2) Essays: Moral, Political and Literary. London: Grant Richards, 1903.
Humphreys, D. (1996) Forest Politics: The Evolution of International Cooperation. London:
Earthscan.

Humphreys, D. (2003) ‘Life Protective or Carcinogenic Challenge? Global Forests Governance
Under Advanced Capitalism’, Global Environmental Politics, vol. 3, no. 2 (May), pp. 40-56.
Huntington, S. P. (1991) The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

Huntington, S. P. (1993) ‘The Clash of Civilizations?’ Foreign Affairs, vol. 72, no. 3 (Summer),
pp. 22-49.

Huntington, S. P. (1996) The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. New
York: Simon &amp; Schuster.

Hurrell, A. and N. Woods (eds) (1999) Inequality, Globalization, and World Politics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Hutanuwatr, P. (2002) Director of Wongsanit Ashram, in conversation with the author in
Bangkok, 13 June.

Hutchings, K. and R. Dannreuther (eds) (1999) Cosmopolitan Citizenship. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Huth, A. (1937) La radiodiffusion. Puissance mondiale [‘Radio Broadcasts: World Power’].
Paris: Gallimard.

Hutton, W. (1996) The State We’re In, rev. edn. London: Vintage.

Ianni, O. (1992) A sociedadeglobal. Rio de Janeiro: Civiliza^ao Brasileira.

Ianni, O. (1996) A era do globalismo. Rio de Janeiro: Civiliza^ao Brasileira.

ICAO (1998) Annual Civil Aviation Report 1997. Montreal: International Civil Aviation
Organisation.

ICAO (2003) Website of the International Civil Aviation Organization: www.icao.org, accessed
on 24 August.

ICFTU (1998) ‘Globalisation on Trial’. Statement of the International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions to the Annual Meetings of the IMF and World Bank.

ICI (2004) 2004 Mutual Fund Fact Book. Washington, DC: Investment Company Institute.

ICI (2005) ‘Trends in Mutual Fund Investing December 2004’, Investment Company Institute
press release, 28 January, available at www.ici.org, accessed on 1 February 2005.

ICLEI (2003) Website of the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives:
http://www.iclei.org, accessed on 14 December.

IDEA (1997) Voter Turnout from 1945 to 1997: A Global Report. Stockholm: Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance.

IFAT (2004) Website of the International Fair Trade Association, www.ifat.org, accessed on 22
October.

IFC (1996) Emerging Stock Markets Factbook 1996. Washington, DC: International Finance
Corporation.

ILGA (2005) Website of the International Lesbian and Gay Association: www.ilga.org, accessed
on 18 January.

ILO (1995) World Employment 1995. Geneva: International Labour Organization.

ILO (1998) Labour and Social Issues Relating to Export Processing Zones. Geneva:
International Labour Organization.

ILO (2003) Employment and Social Policy in Respect of Export Processing Zones (EPZs).
Geneva: International Labour Organization Committee on Employment and Social Policy,
286th session, GB.286/ESP/3.

Imber, M. F. (1989) The USA, ILO, UNESCO and IAEA: Politicization and Withdrawal in the
Specialized Agencies. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.



448 Bibliography


IMF (1993) International Financial Statistics Yearbook. Washington, DC: International
Monetary Fund.

IMF (1996) Annual Report 1996. Washington, DC: International Montary Fund.

IMF (2001) International Capital Markets: Developments, Prospects, and Key Policy Issues.
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

IMF (2003a) Annual Report 2003: Making the Global Economy Work for All. Washington,
DC: International Monetary Fund.

IMF (2003b) ‘Guide for IMF Staff Relations with Civil Society Organizations’, 10 October,
available at www.imf.org/external/np/cso/eng/2003/101003. htm.

IMF (2003c) Website of the International Monetary Fund: www.imf.org/external/
np/ins/english/about.htm, accessed on 15 December.

IMF (2004) ‘IMF Members’ Quotas and Voting Power, and IMF Board of Governors’, 9 April,
online at: www.imf.org/external/np/sec/memdir/ members.htm.

Inayatullah, S. and I. Milojevic (1999) ‘Exclusion and Communication in the Information Era:
From Silences to Global Conversations’, in W. Harcourt (ed.), Women @ Internet: Creating
New Cultures in Cyberspace. London: Zed, pp. 76-90.

Inoguchi, T. (2001) Global Change: A Japanese Perspective. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

INTELSAT (2005) Website of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization,
www.intelsat.com, accessed on 4 May.

Internet (2004) Website of Internet World Stats: www.internetworldstats.com, accessed on 22
October.

IPCC (1995) IPCC Second Assessment. Climate Change 1995. Geneva: World Meteorological
Organization/United Nations Environment Programme.

IPPPFI (2004) Website of the Initiative on Public-Private Partnerships for Health:
www.ippph.org, accessed on 31 August.

ISC (2005) Website of the Internet Software Consortium, www.isc.org, accessed on 4 May.

ISMA (1995) Annual Report 1994. Zurich: International Securities Market Association.

ITU (2004) Website of the International Telecommunication Union, www.itu.int/wsis, accessed
on 3 April.

ITWF (2004) Website of the International Transport Workers Federation, www.itf.org.uk,
accessed on 3 April.

Iyer, P. (2000) The Global Soul: Jet Lag, Shopping Malls, and the Search for Home. New York:
Knopf.

Jackson, J. H. (1998) The World Trade Organisation. London: Cassell.

Jacob, C. (1999) ‘Mapping in the Mind: The Earth from Ancient Alexandria’, in D. Cosgrove
(ed.), Mappings. London: Reaktion Books, pp. 24-49.

James, H. (1996) International Monetary Cooperation since Bretton Woods. New York: Oxford
University Press.

James, H. (2001) The End of Globalization: Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Jameson, F. (1991) Postmodernism, Or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. London: Verso.

Jameson, F. and M. Miyoshi (eds) (1998) The Cultures of Globalization. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

Jarvis, A. P. and A. J. Paolini (1995) ‘Locating the State’, in J. A. Camilleri et al. (eds), The State
in Transition: Reimagining Political Space. Boulder, CO: Rienner, pp. 3-19.

Jenkins, R. et al. (eds) (2002) Corporate Responsibility and Labour Rights: Codes of Conduct in
the Global Economy. London: Earthscan.

Jessop, B. (1993) ‘Towards a Schumpeterian Workfare State? Preliminary Remarks on Post-
Fordist Political Economy’, Studies in Political Economy, vol. 40 (Spring), pp. 7-39

Jessop, B. (1994) ‘Changing Forms and Functions of the State in an Era of Globalization and
Regionalization', in R. Delorme and K. Dopfer (eds), The Political Economy of Diversity:
Evolutionary Perspectives on Economic Order and Disorder. Aldershot: Elgar, pp.
102-25.

Joekes, S. and A. Weston (1994) Women and the New Trade Agenda. New York: UNIFEM.



Bibliography 449


John, J. and A. Chenoy (eds) (1996) Labour, Environment and Globalisation: Social Clause in
Multilateral Trade Agreements: A Southern Response. New Delhi: Centre for Education and
Communication.

Johnson, J. and G. Laxer (2003) ‘Solidarity in the Age of Globalization: Lessons from the Anti-
MAI and Zapatista Struggles’, Theory and Society, vol. 32, pp. 39-91.

Johnson, S. (1998) Black Globalism: the International Politics of a Non-State Nation. Aldershot:
Ashgate.

Johnson, S. and B. Rogaly (1997) Microfinance and Poverty Reduction. Oxford:
Oxfam/ACTIONAID.

Jolly, R. (1995) Remarks by the Acting Director of UNICEF at the World Summit for Social
Development, Copenhagen, 5-12 March.

Jones, A. (1994) ‘Wired World: Communications Technology, Governance and the Democratic
Uprising’, in E. A. Comor (ed.), The Global Political Economy of Communication:
Hegemony, Telecommunication and the Information Economy. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, pp. 145-64.

Jones, C. (1999) Global Justice: Defending Cosmopolitanism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jones, G. (1993) ‘Multinational Banking Strategies’, in H. Cox et al. (eds), The Growth of Global
Business. London: Routledge, pp. 38-61.

Jones, G. (1996) ‘Transnational Corporations - A Historical Perspective’, in UNCTAD,
Transnational Corporations and World Development. London: International Thomson
Business Press, pp. 3-26.

Jones, S. G. (ed.) (1994) CyberSociety: Computer-Mediated Communication and Community.
London: Sage.

Jordan, B. (1995) ‘Globalizing Trade Unions’, Multinational Monitor, vol. 16 (June), pp. 26-8.

Jorgensen, K. E. and B. Rosamond (2002) ‘Europe: Laboratory for a Global Polity?’ in M.
Ougaard and R. Higgott (eds), Towards a Global Polity. London: Routledge, pp. 189-206.

Joyner, D. (2004) ‘Restructuring the Multilateral Export Control Regime System’, Journal of
Conflict and Security Law, vol. 9 (Summer), pp. 181-211.

Juergensmeyer, M. (1993) The New Cold War? Religious Nationalism Confronts the Secular
State. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Justice, D. W. (1999) ‘The New Codes of Conduct and the Social Partners’. Geneva:
International Labour Organization.

Kahler, M. and D. A. Lake (eds) (2003) Governance in a Global Economy: Political Authority
in Transition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kahin, B. and C. Nesson (eds) (1997) Borders in Cyberspace: Information Policy and the Global
Information Infrastructure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Kaiser, R. (2005) ‘Sub-State Governments in International Arenas: Paradiplomacy and Multi-
Level Governance in Europe and North America’, in G. Lachapelle and S. Paquin (eds),
Mastering Globalization: New Sub-States’ Governance and Strategies. London: Routledge,
pp. 90-103.

Kaldor, M. (1999) New and Old Wars: Organised Violence in a Global Era. Cambridge: Polity.

Kaldor, M. (2003) Global Civil Society: An Answer to War. Cambridge: Polity.

Kaldor, M. et al. (2000) ‘Seattle: December ’99?’ Millennium: Journal of International Studies,
vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 103-40.

Kamel, R. (1990) The Global Factory: Analysis and Action for a New Economic Era.
Philadelphia: American Friends Service Committee.

Kaneko, M. (1999) Han Gurouburizumu: Shijou Kaiku no Senryakuteki Shikou [‘Anti-
Globalism: Strategic Thinking on Market Reforms’]. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.

Kang, N.-H. and K. Sakai (2000) International Strategic Alliances: Their Role in Industrial
Globalization. Paris: OECD, STI Working Papers 2000/5.

Kaplan, R.D. (2000) The Coming Anarchy: Shattering the Dreams of the Post Cold War. New
York: Random House.

Kapstein, E. B. (1991-2) ‘ “We Are Us”: the Myth of the Multinational’, The National Interest,
vol. 26 (Winter), pp. 55-62.



450 Bibliography


Kapstein, E. B. (1994) Governing the Global Economy: International Finance and the State.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Kapstein, E. B. (1996) ‘Workers and the World Economy’, Foreign Affairs, vol. 75, no. 3
(May-June), pp. 16-37.

Karatnycky, A. (1999) ‘The 1998 Freedom House Survey: the Decline of Illiberal Democracy’,
Journal of Democracy, vol. 10, no. 1 (January), pp. 112-25.

Katz, P. L. (1988) The Information Society: An International Perspective. New York: Praeger.
Kaul, I. etal. (eds) (1999) Global Public Goods: International Cooperation in the 21st Century.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Kaul, I. etal. (eds) (2003) Providing Public Goods: Managing Globalization. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Kautsky, K. (1914) ‘Ultra-Imperialism’, New Left Review, No. 59 (January-February 1970), pp.
41-6.

Keane, J. (2003) Global Civil Society? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kearney/FP (2001) ‘Measuring Globalization’, Foreign Policy, No. 122 (January-February), pp.
56-65.

Kearney/FP (2002) ‘Globalization’s Last Hurrah?’ Foreign Policy, No. 128 (January-February),
pp. 38-51.

Kearney/FP (2003) ‘Measuring Globalization: Who’s Up, Who’s Down’, Foreign Policy, No.
134 (January-February), pp. 60-72.

Kearney/FP (2004) ‘Economic Reversals, Forward Momentum’, Foreign Policy, No. 141
(March-April), pp. 54-69.

Keating, M. (1999) ‘Regions and International Affairs: Motives, Opportunities and Strategies’,
in F. Aldecoa and M. Keating (eds), Paradiplomacy in Action: The Foreign Relations of
Subnational Governments. London: Cass, pp. 1-16.

Keating, M. (2001) Nations against the State: The Neiv Politics of Nationalism in Quebec,
Catalonia and Scotland. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Keck, M. and K. Sikkink (1998) Activists beyond Borders: Transnational Advocacy Netivorks
in International Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Kempadoo, K. and J. Doezema (eds) (1998) Global Sex Workers: Rights, Resistance, and
Redefinition. London: Routledge.

Kennedy, P. and C. J. Danks (eds) (2001) Globalization and National Identities: Crisis or
Opportunity? Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kennedy, P. M. (1987) The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military
Conflict from 1500 to 2000. New York: Random House.

Keohane, R. O. (1998) ‘International Institutions: Can Interdependence Work?’ Foreign Policy,
No. 110 (Spring), pp. 82-96.

Keohane, R. O. (2001) ‘Governance in a Partially Globalized World’, American Political Science
Review, vol. 95, no. 1 (March), pp. 1-13.

Keohane, R. O. and L. L. Martin (1995) ‘The Promise of Institutionalist Theory’, International
Security, vol. 20, no. 1 (Summer), pp. 39-51.

Keohane, R. O. and J. S. Nye (1977) Power and Interdependence: World Politics in Transition.
Boston, MA: Little, Brown.

Keohane, R. O. and J. S. Nye (2000) ‘Globalization: What’s New? What’s Not? (And So What?)’
Foreign Policy, no. 118 (Spring), pp. 104-19.

Kepel, G. (1991) The Revenge of God: the Resurgence of Islam, Christianity and Judaism in the
Modern World. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1994.

Kerr, I. M. (1984) A History of the Eurobond Market: the First 21 Years. London: Euromoney.
Kessler, C. S. (2000) ‘Globalization: Another False Universalism?’ Third World Quarterly, vol.
21, no. 6, pp. 931-42.

Khagram, S. (2000) ‘Toward Democratic Governance for Sustainable Development:
Transnational Civil Society Organizing around Big Dams’, in A. M. Florini (ed.), The Third
Force: The Rise of Transnational Civil Society. Tokyo/Washington, DC: Japan Center for
International Exchange/Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, pp. 83-114.



Bibliography 451


Khagram, S. et al. (eds) (2002) Restructuring World Politics: Transnational Social Movements,
Networks, and Norms. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Khan, L. A. (1996) The Extinction of Nation-States: A World without Borders. The Hague:
Kluwer Law International.

Khor, M. (1995) Address to the International Forum on Globalization, New York City, November.

Khor, M. (2001) Globalization and the South. Penang, Malaysia: Third World Network.

Kidder, T. and M. McGinn (1995) ‘In the Wake of NAFTA: Transnational Workers’ Networks’,
Social Policy, vol. 25, no. 4 (Summer), pp. 14-21.

Kidron, M. and R. Segal (1995) The State of the World Atlas, 5th edn. London: Penguin.

Kilminster, R. (1997) ‘Globalization as an Emergent Concept’, in A. Scott (ed.), The Limits of
Globalization: Cases and Arguments. London: Routledge, pp. 257-83.

Kim, S. S. ‘Chinese Perspectives on World Order’, in D. Jacobsen (ed.), Old Nations, Neiv
World: Conceptions of World Order. Boulder, CO: Westview, pp. 37-74.

King, A. and B. Schneider (1991) The First Global Revolution: A Report by the Council of the
Club of Rome. New York: Pantheon.

King, A. D. (2000) ‘Cities: Contradictory Utopias’, in J. Nederveen Pieterse (ed.), Global
Futures: Shaping Globalization. London: Sage, pp. 224-41.

King, A. D. (ed.) (1991) Culture, Globalization and the World-System: Contemporary
Conditions for the Representation of Identity. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

King, R. et al. (2000) Sunset Lives: British Retirement Migration to the Mediterranean. Oxford:
Berg.

Kingsnorth, P. (2003) One No, Many Yeses: A Journey to the Heart of the Global Resistance
Movement. London: Free Press.

Kirton, J. J. et al. (eds) (2001) Guiding Global Order: G8 Governance in the Twenty-First
Century. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Kitchin, R. (1998) ‘Towards Geographies of Cyberspace’, Progress in Human Geography, vol.
22, no. 3, pp. 385-406.

Kitchin, R. and M. Dodge (2002) ‘The Emerging Geographies of Cyberspace’, in R. J. Johnston
et al. (eds), Geographies of Global Change: Remapping the World. Oxford: Blackwell, pp.
340-54.

Klein, N. (2000) No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies. London: Flamingo.

Klein, N. (2002) Fences and Windows: Dispatches from the Front Lines of the Globalization
Debate. Toronto: Vintage Canada.

Knill, C. and D. Lehmkuhl (2002) ‘Private Actors and the State: Internationalization and
Changing Patterns of Governance’, Governance: An International Journal of Public Policy,
vol. 15, no. 1 (January), pp. 41-64.

Kobrin, S. J. (1998a) ‘Back to the Future: Neomedievalism and the Post Modern Digital World
Economy ’, Journal of International Affairs, vol. 51, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 361-86.

Kobrin, S. J. (1998b) ‘The MAI and the Clash of Globalizations’, Foreign Policy, no. 112
(Autumn), pp. 97-109.

Koch, C. (2003) The Day the World Said NO to War: 02/15. Edinburgh: AK Distribution.

Korten, D. C. (1995) When Corporations Rule the World. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press.

Kotkin, J. (1992) Tribes: How Race, Religion, and Identity Determine Success in the New
Global Economy. New York: Random House.

Kraidy, M. M. (1999) ‘The Global, the Local, and the Hybrid: A Native Ethnography of
Glocalization’, Critical Studies in Mass Communication, vol. 16, no. 4 (December), pp.
456-76.

Krasner, S. D. (1993) ‘Economic Interdependence and Independent Statehood’, in R. H. Jackson
and A. James (eds), States in a Changing World: A Contemporary Analysis. Oxford:
Clarendon, pp. 301-21.

Krasner, S. D. (1994) ‘International Political Economy: Abiding Discord’, Review of
International Political Economy, vol. l,no. 1 (Spring), pp. 13-19.

Krasner, S. D. (1999) Sovereignty: Organized Hypocrisy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.



452 Bibliography


Krasner, S. D. (2001) ‘Abiding Sovereignty’, International Political Science Review, vol. 22, no.
3 (July), pp. 229-52.

Krasner, S. D. (ed.) (2003) Problematic Sovereignty: Contested Rules and Political Possibilities.
New York: Columbia University Press.

Krause, K. and M. C. Williams (eds) (1997) Critical Security Studies: Concepts and Cases.
London: UCL Press.

Kroebner, A. L. (1945) ‘The Ancient Greek Oikoumene as an Historic Culture Aggregate’,
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. 75, pp. 9-20.
Krueger, A. O. (ed.) (1998) The WTO as an International Organization. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Krugman, P. (2000) The Return of Depression Economics. London: Penguin, rev’d edn.

Ku, C. (2001) Global Governance and the Changing Face of International Law. New Haven,
CN: ACUNS Reports &amp; Papers, No. 2.

Kuhn, S. E. (1995) ‘Winning Strategies for the Next Ten Years’, Fortune, vol. 132, no. 25 (25
December), pp. 44-50.

Kung, H. (1990) Global Responsibility: In Search of a New World Ethic. London: SCM, 1991.
Kung, H. and K.-J. Kuschel (eds) (1993) A Global Ethic: The Declaration of the Parliament of
the World’s Religions. London: SCM.

Kurzer, P. (1993) Business and Banking: Political Change and Economic Integration in Western
Europe. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Kwon, H. (2000) ‘Globalisation, Unemployment and Policy Responses in Korea: Repositioning
the State?’ Paper to the Globalism and Social Policy Programme seminar, New Delhi,
November.

Kymlicka, W. (2001) Contemporary Political Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2nd
edn.

Lacarrieu, M. and L. Raggio (1997) ‘Citizenship within the Globalization Context: an Analysis
of Trends within Mercosur’, The Mankind Quarterly, vol. 37, no. 3 (Spring), pp. 263-81.
Lang, T. and C. Hines (1993) The New Protectionism: Protecting the Future against Free Trade.
London: Earthscan.

Langmore, J. et al. (2002) ‘Global Social Policy Forum: The Future of Finance for Development’,
Global Social Policy, vol. 2, no. 2 (August), pp. 131-9.

Lapidoth, R. (1992) ‘Sovereignty in Transition’, Journal of International Affairs, vol. 45, no. 2
(Winter), pp. 325-46.

Lash, S. (1990) Sociology of Postmodernism. London: Routledge.

Lash, S. and J. Urry (1994) Economies of Signs and Space. London: Sage.

Latinobarometro (2004) Summary Report Latinobarometro 2004: A Decade of Measurements.
Santiago: Corporation Latinobarometro.

Leanne, S. (1994) ‘African-American Initiatives against Minority Rule in South Africa: A
Politicized Diaspora in World Politics’. Doctoral dissertation, University of Oxford.
Lechner, F. J. and J. Boli (eds) (2000) The Globalization Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.

Leclerc, G. (2000) La mondialisation culturelle. Les civilisations a I’epreuve. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.

Lee, E. (1996) The Labour Movement and the Internet: The New Internationalism. London:
Pluto.

Lee, E. (1997a) ‘Globalisation and Labour Standards: A Review of the Issues’, International
Labour Review, vol. 136, no. 2 (Summer), pp. 173-190.

Lee, E. (1997b) The Labour Movement and the Internet: The New Internationalism. London:
Pluto.

Lee, H.K. (1999) ‘Globalization and the Emerging Welfare State - The Experience of South
Korea’, International Journal of Social Welfare, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 23-37.

Lee, K. (ed.) (2003) Health Impacts of Globalization: Towards Global Governance.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Lee, K. et al. (eds) (2002) Health Policy in a Globalising World. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.



Bibliography 453


Lefebvre, H. (1974) The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell, 1991.

LeHeron, R. (1993) Globalized Agriculture: Political Choice. Oxford: Pergamon.

Lehmkuhl, D. (2003) ‘Resolving Transnational Disputes: Commercial Arbitration and the
Multiple Providers of Governance Services’. Paper for the 2003 ECPR Joint Sessions,
Edinburgh, 28 March-2 April.

Lekhi, R. (2000) ‘The Politics of African America On-Line’, Democratization, vol. 7, no. 1
(Spring), pp. 76-101.

Lenin, V. I. (1917) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. New York: International
Publishers, 1939.

Levich, R. M. et al. (eds) (2002) Ratings, Rating Agencies and the Global Financial System.
Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic.

Levitt, T. (1983) ‘The Globalization of Markets’, Harvard Business Review, vol. 61, no. 3
(May-June), pp. 92-102.

Lewis, W. A. (1978) The Evolution of the International Economic Order. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Lietaer, B. (1996) ‘Global Currency Proposals’, in J. M. Griesgraber and B. G. Gunter (eds), The
World’s Monetary System: Toward Stability and Sustainability in the Twenty-First Century.
London: Pluto, pp. 94-114.

Lim, L. (1990) ‘Women’s Work in Export Factories: the Politics of Cause’, in I. Tinker (ed.),
Persistent Inequalities: Women and World Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 101-19.

Lindert, P. H. and J. G. Williamson (2001) ‘Does Globalization Make the World More
Unequal?’ NBER Working Paper Series No. 8228.

Ling, L. H. M. (2000) ‘Globalization and the Spectre of Fu Manchu: White Man’s Burden as
Dark Irony’, in J.-S. Fritz and M. Lensu (eds), Value Pluralism, Normative Theory and
International Relations. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 132-59.

Linklater, A. (1998) The Transformation of Political Community: Ethical Foundations of the
Post-Westphalian Era. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Linklater, A. (2002) ‘Cosmopolitan Citizenship’, in E. F. Isin and B. S. Turner (eds), Handbook
of Citizenship Studies. London: Sage, pp. 317-32.

Lipschutz, R. D. (1992) ‘Reconstructing World Politics: The Emergence of Global Civil Society’,
Millennium, vol. 21, no. 3 (Winter), pp. 389-420.

Lipschutz, R. D. with J. Mayer (1996) Global Civil Society and Global Environmental
Governance. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Litfin, K. T. (ed.) (1998) The Greening of Sovereignty in World Politics. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Llambi, L. (1994) ‘Comparative Advantages and Disadvantages in Latin American
Nontraditional Fruit and Vegetable Exports’, in P. McMichael (ed.), The Global
Restructuring of Agro-Food Systems. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, pp. 190-213.

Lloyd, J. (1998) ‘ “Digital Age” Skirts Rural America’s Sparsely Populated Areas, Especially in
the West, Are Missing High-Tech Infrastructure Vital to 21 st -Century Economy’, Christian
Science Monitor, 31 December.

Loader, B. D. (ed.) (1998) Cyberspace Divide: Equality, Agency and Policy in the Information
Society. London: Routledge.

LoC (1999), Website of the Library of Congress, http://lcweb.loc.gov/catalog/, accessed on 6
December.

LoC (2005) Website of the Library of Congress, http://catalog.loc.gov/, accessed on 7 February.

Lockwood, B. (2004) ‘How Robust Is the Kearney/Foreign Policy Globalisation Index?’ The
World Economy, vol. 27, no. 4 (April), pp. 507-24.

Lorwin, L. L. (1953) The International Labor Movement: History, Policies, Outlook. New
York: Harper &amp; Brothers.

Lovelock, J. E. (1979) Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lovelock, J. E. (1972) ‘Gaia as Seen through the Atmosphere’, Atmospheric Environment, vol.
6, issue 8 (August), pp. 579-80.



454 Bibliography


Low, M. (1997) ‘Representation Unbound: Globalization and Democracy’, in K. R. Cox (ed.),
Spaces of Globalization: Reasserting the Power of the Local. New York: Guilford, pp.
240-80.

Lowenfeld, A. F. (2002) International Litigation and Arbitration. St. Paul, MN: West Group,
2nd edn.

Luce, C.B. (1943) Speech to the House of Representatives, Congressional Record, vol. 89, 9
February.

Luhmann, N. (1982) ‘The World Society as a Social System’, International Journal of General
Systems, vol. 8, pp. 131-8.

Luke, T. W. (1995) ‘New World Order or Neo-World Orders: Power, Politics and Ideology in
Informationalizing Glocalities’, in M. Featherstone etal., Global Modernities. London: Sage,
pp. 91-107.

MacAloon, J. J. (1981) This Great Symbol: Pierre de Coubertin and the Origins of the Modern
Olympic Games. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mackenzie, D. (1990) Inventing Accuracy: A Historical Sociology of Nuclear Missile Guidance.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Mackinlay, J. (2002) Globalisation and Insurgency. Oxford: Oxford University Press, Adelphi
Paper 352.

Maclean, J. (1999) ‘Philosophical Roots of Globalization: Philosophical Routes to
Globalization’, in R. Germain (ed.), Globalization and its Critics: Perspectives from Political
Economy. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 3-66.

Madden, P. (1992) Raw Deal: Trade and the World’s Poor. London: Christian Aid.

Magdoff, H. (1992) ‘Globalization - to What End?’, in R. Miliband and L. Panitch (eds),
Socialist Register 1992. London: Merlin, pp. 44-75.

Maghroori, R. and B. Ramberg (eds) (1982) Globalism versus Realism: International Relations’
Third Debate. Boulder, CO: Westview.

Maguire, K. (2000) ‘A Tobacco Giant and Its Global Reach’, Guardian, 31 January.

Main, J. (1989) ‘How To Go Global - and Why’, Fortune, vol. 120, no. 5 (28 August), pp.
54-8.

Manalansan, M. (1997) ‘In the Shadows of Stonewall: Examining Gay Transnational Politics
and the Diasporic Dilemma’, in L. Lowe and D. Lloyd (eds), The Politics of Culture in the
Shadow of Capital. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, pp. 485-505.

Mandaville, P. G. (2001) Transnational Muslim Politics: Reimagining the Umma. London:
Routledge.

Mandel, R. (2002) Armies without States: The Privatization of Security. Boulder, CO: Rienner.

Mandell, L. (1990) The Credit Card Industry: A History. Boston: Twayne.

Mander, J. and E. Goldsmith (eds) (1996) The Case against the Global Economy and the Turn
to the Local. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books.

Mani, M. and D. Wheeler (1998) ‘In Search of Pollution Havens? Dirty Industry in the World
Economy, 1960 to 1995’, Journal of Environment and Development, vol. 7, no. 3
(September), pp. 215-47.

Mann, M. (1986) The Sources of Social Power. Vol. I: A History of Power from the Beginning
to A.D. 1760. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Mann, M. (1988) States, War and Capitalism: Studies in Political Sociology. Oxford: Blackwell.

Mann, M. (1997) ‘Has Globalization Ended the Rise and Rise of the Nation-State?’, Review of
International Political Economy, vol. 4, no. 3 (Autumn), pp. 472-96.

Mansfield, E. D. and H. V. Milner (eds) (1997) The Political Economy of Regionalism. New
York: Columbia University Press.

Marchand, M. H. and A. S. Runyan (eds) (2000) Gender and Global Restructuring: Sightings,
Sites and Resistances. London: Routledge.

Marglin, S. A. (1988) Lessons of the Golden Age of Capitalism. Helsinki: World Institute for
Development Economics Research.

Mariana (2002) Activist with the Homeless Workers Movement (MTST), interviewed by the
author in Rio de Janeiro on 28 January.



Bibliography 455


Marks, G. et al. (1996) Governance in the European Union. London: Sage.

Marrison, A. (ed.) (1998) Free Trade and Its Reception 1815-1960. London: Routledge.
Marshall, D. D. (1996) ‘Understanding Late-Twentieth-Century Capitalism: Reassessing the
Globalization Theme’, Government and Opposition, vol. 31, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 193-215.
Martib, B. (2000) New Leaf or Fig Leaf: The Challenge of the New 'Washington Consensus.

London: Bretton Woods Project and Public Services International.

Martin, H.-P. and H. Schumann (1996) The Global Trap: Globalization and the Assault on
Prosperity and Democracy. London: Zed, 1997.

Martinez, E. (2000) ‘Where Was the Color in Seattle? Looking for Reasons Why the Great Battle
was so White?’ ColorLines, vol. 3, no. 1 (Spring), available online at www.arc.org/
C_Lines/CLArchive/story3_l_02.html, accessed on 1 February 2005.

Marty, M. E. and R. S. Appleby (eds) (1991) Fundamentalisms Observed. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Marx, K. (1857-8) Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy.
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973.

Marx, K. (1867) Capital, Volume I. London: Lawrence &amp; Wishart, 1970.

Marx, K. and F. Engels (1848) Manifesto of the Communist Party. Moscow: Progress, 1977.
Maskus, K. E. (2000) Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy. Washington, DC:

Institute for International Economics.

Massey, D. (1994) Space, Place and Gender. Cambridge: Polity.

MasterCard (2003) Website of MasterCard, www.mastercard.com, accessed on 18 July and 23
August.

Mattelart, A. (1989) Advertising International: The Privatisation of Public Space. London:
Routledge, 1991.

Mattli, W. (2001) ‘Private Justice in a Global Economy: From Litigation to Arbitration’,
International Organization, vol. 55, no. 4 (Autumn), pp. 919—48.

Mawle, A. (1997) ‘Women, Environment and the United Nations’, in F. Dodds (ed.), The Way
Forward: Beyond Agenda 21. London: Earthscan, pp. 146-57.

Mayall, J. (ed.) (1996) The New Interventionism 1991-1994. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Mayobre, E. (ed.) (1999) G-24: The Developing Countries in the International Financial System.
Boulder, CO: Rienner.

Mazlish, B. and R. Buultjens (eds) (1993) Conceptualizing Global History. Boulder, CO:
Westview.

Mazrui, A. A. (1994) ‘Global Apartheid: Structural and Overt’, Alternatives, vol. 19, no. 2
(Spring), pp. 185-7.

McChesney, R. W. (1997) ‘The Global Media Giants: The Nine Firms that Dominate the World’,
Extra, November/December, online at: www.fair.org/extra/9711/gmg.html, accessed on 1
February 2005.

McChesney, R. W. et al. (eds) (1998) Capitalism and the Information Age: The Political
Economy of the Global Communication Revolution. New York: Monthly Review
Press.

McCormick, J. (1989) Reclaiming Paradise: The Global Environmental Movement.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

McCulloch, N. et al. (2001) Trade Liberalization and Poverty: A Handbook. London:
CEPR/DFID.

McDowell, L. and G. Court (1994) ‘Gender Divisions of Labour in the Post-Fordist Economy:
The Maintenance of Occupational Sex Segregation in the Financial Services Sector’,
Environment and Planning A, vol. 26, no. 9 (September), pp. 1397-418.

McGrew, A. (1997a) ‘Globalization and Territorial Democracy: An Introduction’, in A.
McGrew (ed.), The Transformation of Democracy? Globalization and Territorial
Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 1-24.

McGrew, A. (ed.) (1997b) The Transformation of Democracy? Globalization and Territorial
Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.



456 Bibliography


McGrew, A. (2006) ‘Democracy’, in R. Robertson and J. A. Scholte (eds), Encyclopedia of
Globalization. London: Routledge.

McKelvey, M. et al. (eds) (2004) The Economic Dynamics of Modern Biotechnology.
Cheltenham: Elgar.

McKenzie, R. B. and D. R. Lee (1991) Quicksilver Capitalism: Elow the Rapid Movement of
Wealth Has Changed the World. New York: Free Press.

McLuhan, M. and Q. Fiore (1968) War and Peace in the Global Village. New York: McGraw-Hill.

McMichael, P. (1993) ‘World Food System Restructuring under a GATT Regime’, Political
Geography, vol. 12, no. 3 (May), pp. 198-214.

McMichael, P. (1996a) Development and Social Change: A Global Perspective. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Pine Forge Press.

McMichael, P. (1996b) ‘Globalization: Myths and Realities’, Rural Sociology, vol. 61, no. 1
(Spring), pp. 25-55.

McMichael, P. (ed.) (1994) The Global Restructuring of Agro-Food Systems. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.

McNeill, W. H. (1963) The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Community. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

McNeill, W. H. (1976) Plagues and Peoples. Oxford: Blackwell.

McNeill, W. H. (1986) Polyethnicity and National Unity in World History. Toronto: University
of Toronto Press.

McQuaig, L. (1999) The Cult of Impotence. Toronto: Penguin.

Meadows, D. H. et al. (1992) Beyond the Limits: A Global Collapse or a Sustainable Future.
London: Earthscan.

Mehta, M. (2006) ‘Nanotechnology’, in R. Robertson and J. A. Scholte (eds), Encyclopedia of
Globalization. London: Routledge.

Mekata, M. (2000) ‘Building Partnerships toward a Common Goal: Experiences of the
International Campaign to Ban Landmines’, in A. M. Florini (ed.), The Third Force: The Rise
of Transnational Civil Society. Tokyo/Washington, DC: Japan Center for International
Exchange/Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, pp. 143-76.

Mendell, M. and D. Salee (eds) (1991) The Legacy of Karl Polanyi: Market, State and Society at
the End of the Twentieth Century. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Mendonsa, E. (2001) Continuity and Change in a West African Society: Globalization’s Impact
on the Sisala of Ghana. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press.

Merle, M. (1974) Sociologie des relations internationales. Paris: Dalloz.

Mertes, T. (ed.) (2004) A Movement of Movements: Is Another World Really Possible? London:
Verso.

Meyer, B. and P. Geschiere (eds) (1998) ‘Globalisation and Identity: Dialectics of Flows and
Closures’, Development and Change, vol. 29, no. 4 (October), pp. 601-928.

Meyer, J. et al. (1997) ‘World Society and the Nation-State’, American Journal of Sociology, vol.
103, no. 1, pp. 144-81.

Mhone, G. and O. Edigheji (eds) (2003) Governance in the New South Africa: The Challenges of
Globalisation. Lansdowne: University of Cape Town Press.

Michelmann, H. J. and P. Soldatos (eds) (1990) Federalism and International Relations: The
Role of Subnational Units. Oxford: Clarendon.

Michie, J. (ed.) (2003) The Handbook of Globalisation. Cheltenham: Elgar.

Mies, M. (1998) Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale: Women in the International
Division of Labour. London: Zed, 2nd edn.

Milanovic, B. (1999) ‘True World Income Distribution, 1988 and 1993: First Calculation Based
on Household Surveys Alone’, World Bank Policy Research Working Papers No. 2244,
November.

Milanovic, B. (2005) Worlds Apart: Measuring Global and International Inequality. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

Miles, E. L. et al. (2002) Environmental Regime Effectiveness: Confronting Theory with
Evidence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.



Bibliography 457


Miller, M. (1991) Debt and the Environment: Converging Crises. New York: United Nations.
Miller, M. et al. (2004) ‘World Finance and the US “New Economy”: Welfare Efficiency and
Moral Hazard’. Draft paper, October.

Minear, L. and T. G. Weiss (1995) Mercy under Fire: War and the Global Humanitarian
Community. Boulder, CO: Westview.

Mingkwan, Suwan and Tern Tarat (2002) Fisherfolk in Ubon Ratchathani Province, Thailand,
in discussion with the author in Mae Mun Man Yuan village on 16 June.

Mishra, R. (1999) Globalization and the Welfare State. Cheltenham: Elgar.

MIT (2004) Website of the Unwiring the World Project: http://www.media.mit.edu/
unwired/assumptions.html, accessed on 22 October.

Mittelman, J. H. (1999) The Future of Globalization. Bangi: Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia.

Mittelman, J. H. (2000) The Globalization Syndrome: Transformation and Resistance.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Mittelman, J. H. (2002) ‘Globalization: An Ascendant Paradigm?’, International Studies
Perspectives, vol. 3, no. 1 (February), pp. 1-14.

Mittelman, J. H. and R. Johnston (1999) ‘The Globalization of Organized Crime, the Courtesan
State, and the Corruption of Civil Society’, Global Governance, vol. 5, no. 1
(January-March), pp. 103-26.

Mittelman, J. H. and N. Othman (eds) (2001) Capturing Globalization. London: Routledge.
Mlinar, Z. (ed.) (1992) Globalization and Territorial Identities. Aldershot: Avebury.
Moghadam, V. M. (ed.) (1993) Democratic Reform and the Position of Women in Transitional
Economies. Oxford: Clarendon.

Mohanty, C. T. (2003) Feminism without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Monbiot, G. (2003) The Age of Consent: A Manifesto for a New World Order. London:
Flamingo.

Moon, G. (1995) Free Trade: What’s in it for Women? Fitzroy (Australia): Community Aid
Abroad.

Morrison, B. (ed.) (2003) Transnational Democracy: A Critical Consideration of Sites and
Sources. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Morrissey, O. and I. Filatotchev (2000) ‘Globalisation and Trade: The Implications for Exports
from Marginalised Economies’, Journal of Development Studies, vol. 37, no. 2 (December),

pp. 1-12.

Mosco, V. (1988) ‘Introduction: Information in the Pay-Per Society’ inMosco and J. Wasko (eds),
The Political Economy of Information. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, pp. 3-26.
Mosler, D. and R. Catley (2000) Global America: Imposing Liberalism on a Recalcitrant World.
Westport, CT: Praeger.

Mosse, G. L. (1985) Nationalism and Sexuality: Respectability and Abnormal Sexuality in
Modern Europe. New York: Fertig.

Mowlana, H. (1997) Global Information and World Communication: New Frontiers in
International Relations. London: Sage, 2nd edn.

MPA (2004) Website of the Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore, www.mpa.gov.sg,
accessed on 8 February.

Munch, R. (2001) Nation and Citizenship in the Global Age: From National to Transnational
Ties and Identities. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Munck, R. (2002) Globalisation and Labour: The New Great Transformation. London: Zed.
Munck, R. and P. Waterman (eds) (1999) Labour Worldwide in the Era of Globalization:

Alternative Union Models in the New World Order. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Murphy, C. N. (1994) International Organization and Industrial Change: Global Governance
since 1850. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Musa, M. (1997) ‘From Optimism to Reality: an Overview of Third World News Agencies’, in
P. Golding and P. Harris (eds), Beyond Cultural Imperialism: Globalization,
Communication and the New International Order. London: Sage, pp. 117-46.



458 Bibliography


Muzaffar, C. (1993) Human Rights and the New World Order. Penang: Just World Trust.

MWD (2003) Merriam-Webster Dictionary, www.m-w.com/cgi-bin/dictionary, accessed on 16
September.

My Vuong, T. (1999) ‘World Wide Net: Vietnamese Using High Tech to Stay in Touch with
Culture’, San Jose Mercury News, 20 February.

Myers, N. (1993) Ultimate Security: the Environmental Basis of Political Stability. New York:
Norton.

Myers, N. (1996) ‘Problems of the Next Century’. Paper for UNED-UK seminar, Green College,
Oxford, 24 June.

Myers, N. (ed.) (1985) The Gaia Atlas of Planet Management. London: Pan.

Myhre, D. (1994) ‘The Politics of Globalization in Rural Mexico: Campesino Initiatives to
Restructure the Agricultural Credit System’, in P. McMichael (ed.), The Global
Restructuring of Agro-Food Systems. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, pp. 145-69.

Naess, A. (1976) Ecology, Community and Lifestyle. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989.

Nahavandian, M. (2004) Director of the National Globalization Studies Programme of Iran, in
discussions with the author, Tehran, 23 and 25 December.

Naisbitt, J. (1994) Global Paradox: The Bigger the World Economy, the More Powerful Its
Smallest Players. London: Brealey.

Naples, N. and M. Desai (eds) (2002) Women’s Activism and Globalization. London:
Routledge.

Naughton, J. (2001) ‘Contested Space: The Internet and Global Civil Society’, in H. Anheier et
al. (eds), Global Civil Society 2001. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 147-68.

Nayyar, D. (ed.) (2002) Governing Globalization: Issues and Institutions. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Neal, L. (1985) ‘Integration of International Capital Markets: Quantitative Evidence from the
Eighteenth to Twentieth Centuries’, Journal of Economic History, vol. 45, no. 2 (June), pp.
219-26.

Nederveen Pieterse, J. (1995) ‘Globalization as Hybridization’, in M. Featherstone et al. (eds),
Global Modernities. London: Sage, pp. 45-68.

Nederveen Pieterse, J. (ed.) (2000) Global Futures: Shaping Globalization. London: Sage.

Nederveen Pieterse, J. (2004) Globalization and Culture: Global Melange. Lanham, MD:
Rowman &amp; Littlefield.

Neef, D. (1998) The Knowledge Economy. Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.

Negroponte, N. (1995) Being Digital. London: Hodder &amp; Stoughton.

Nescafe (2003) Website of Nescafe, www.nescafe.com/main_nest.asp, accessed on 14 July.

Neufeld, M. J. (1995) The Rocket and the Reich: Peenemunde and the Coming of the Ballistic
Missile Era. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Neumayer, E. (2001) Greening Trade and Investment: Environmental Protection Without
Protectionism. London: Earthscan.

Newell, P. (2000) Climate for Change: Non-State Actors and the Global Politics of the
Greenhouse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Newell, P. and J. Whalley (1999) ‘Towards a World Environment Organisation?’ IDS Bulletin,
vol. 30, no. 3 (July), pp. 16-24.

NIC (2001) The Global Infectious Disease Threat and its Implications for the United States.
Washington, DC: National Intelligence Council, NIC 99-17D.

Nicholson, M. (1999) ‘How Novel Is Globalisation?’ in M. Shaw (ed.), Politics and
Globalisation: Knowledge, Ethics and Agency. London: Routledge, pp. 23-34.

Niebuhr, R. (1932) Moral Man and Immoral Society: A Study in Ethics and Politics. New York:
Scribner.

Norberg-Hodge, H. (1999a) ‘Bringing the Economy Back Home: Towards a Culture of Place’,
The Ecologist, vol. 29, no. 3 (May/June), pp. 215-18.

Norberg-Hodge, H. (1999b) ‘The March of the Monoculture’, The Ecologist, vol. 29, no. 3
(May-June), pp.194-7.



Bibliography 459


Norris, P. (2001) Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information Poverty, and the Internet
Worldwide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Notes from Nowhere (2003) We Are Everywhere: The Irresistible Rise of Global Antic
Capitalism. London: Verso.

Nussbaum, M. C. et al. (1996) For Love of Country. Boston, MA: Beacon Books.

Nye, J. S. (1990) Bound to Lead: The Changing Nature of American Power. New York: Basic Books.

Nye, J. S. and J. D. Donahue (eds) (2000) Governance in a Globalizing World. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.

O Tuathail, G. (1996) Critical Geopolitics: The Politics of Writing Global Space. London:
Routledge.

O Tuathail, G. (1998) ‘Political Geography III: Dealing with Deterritorialization’, Progress in
Human Geography, vol. 22, no. 1 (March), pp. 81-93.

O Tuathail, G. (2000) ‘Borderless Worlds? Problematising Discourses of Deterritorialisation’,
Geopolitics, vol. 4, no. 2 (Autumn), pp. 139-54.

O’Brien, R. (1992) Global Financial Integration: The End of Geography. London: Pinter.

O’Brien, R. (2000) ‘The Agency of Labour in a Changing Global Order’, in R. Stubbs and G. R.
D. Underhill (eds), Political Economy and the Changing Global Order. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 38-47.

O’Brien, R. et al. (2000) Contesting Global Governance: Multilateral Economic Institutions and
Global Social Movements. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

O’Byrne, D. J. (2003) The Dimensions of Global Citizenship: Political Identity beyond the
Nation-State. London: Frank Cass.

O’Rourke, K. (2002) ‘Globalization and Inequality: Historical Trends’, in World Bank, Annual
Bank Conference on Development Economics 2001/2002. New York: Oxford University
Press, pp. 39-67.

O’Rourke, K. H. and J. G. Williamson (1999) Globalization and History: The Evolution of a
Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

OECD (1996a) Financial Market Trends 63. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development, February.

OECD (1996b) International Capital Market Statistics 1950-1995. Paris: Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development.

OECD (2001) Bridging the Digital Divide: Issues and Policies in the OECD Countries. Paris:
OECD Committee for Information, Computers and Communication Policy.

OECD (2004) OECD in Figures 2004: Statistics on the Member Countries. Paris: Organisation
for Economic Cooperation and Development.

OED (1989) The Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford: Clarendon, 2nd edn.

Ohmae, K. (1990) The Borderless World: Power and Strategy in the Interlinked Economy. New
York: HarperCollins.

Ohmae, K. (1995) ‘Putting Global Logic First’, Harvard Business Review, vol. 73, no. 1
(January-February), pp. 119-25.

Olesen, T. (2002) ‘Long Distance Zapatismo: Globalization and the Construction of Solidarity’.
PhD dissertation, University of Aarhus.

Oliveira, J. J. de (2004) National council member of the Movement of Dam-Affected People
(MAB), in discussion with the author, Brasilia, 20 November.

Oloka-Onyango, J. (1999) ‘Comprehensive Examination of Thematic Relating to the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Globalization in the Context of Increasing Incidence
of Racism, Racial Discrimination and Xenophobia’. Working paper for ECOSOC,
Commission on Human Rights, Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discriminations and
Protection of Minorities, in accordance with Sub-Commission Decision 1998/104.

Onuf, N. G. (1991) ‘Sovereignty: Outline of a Conceptual History’, Alternatives, vol. 16, no. 4
(Fall), pp. 425-46.

Ooms, G. (2004) Remarks by the General Director of Medecins sans Frontieres, Belgium to a
conference on ‘Power and Responsibility: The Changing Role of Non State Actors’, Brussels,
1 December.



460 Bibliography


OPCW (2004) Website of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
http://www.opcw.nl/, accessed on 13 January.

Ortega y Gasser, J. (1930) The Revolt of the Masses. London: Allen &amp; Unwin, 1961.

Osiander, A. (2001) ‘Sovereignty, International Relations, and the Westphalian Myth’,
International Organization, vol. 55, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 251-87.

Ougaard, M. (2004) Political Globalization: State, Power and Social Forces. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Paasi, A. (2003) ‘Territory’, in J. Agnew et al. (eds), A Companion to Political Geography.
Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 109-22.

Paehlke, R. C. (2003) Democracy’s Dilemma: Environment, Social Equity, and the Global
Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Palan, R. (1998) ‘Trying to Have Your Cake and Eating It: How and Why the State System Has
Created Offshore’, International Studies Quarterly, vol. 42, no. 4 (December), pp. 625-44.
Palan, R. (2003) The Offshore World: Sovereign Markets, Virtual Places, and Nomad
Millionaires. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Panitch, L. (1996) ‘Rethinking the Role of the State’, in J. H. Mittelman (ed.), Globalization:

Critical Reflections. Boulder, CO: Rienner, pp. 83-113.

Parlamento Centroamericano (2004) Website of the Central American Parliament, www.parla-
cen.org.gt/, accessed on 2 November.

Parrefias, R. S. (2001) Servants of Globalization: Women Migration and Domestic Work.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Patel, S. et al. (2001) ‘Squatting on the Global Highway: Community Exchanges for Urban
Transformation’, in M. Edwards and J. Gaventa (eds), Global Citizen Action. Boulder, CO:
Rienner, pp. 231-45.

Patomaki, H. (2001) Democratising Globalisation: The Leverage of the Tobin Tax. London:
Zed

Patomaki, H. and T. Teivainen (2004) A Possible World: Democratic Transformation of Global
Institutions. London: Zed Books.

Pauly, L. W. (1997) Who Elected the Bankers? Surveillance and Control in the World Economy.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Pearson, R. (1998) ‘ “Nimble Fingers” Revisited: Reflections on Women and Third World
Industrialisation in the Late Twentieth Century’, in C. Jackson and R. Pearson (eds), Feminist
Visions of Development: Gender Analysis and Policy. London: Routledge, pp. 171-88.
Pease, B. and K. Pringle (eds) (2001) A Man’s World? Changing Men’s Practices in a Globalized
World. London: Zed.

Peccei, A. (1969) The Chasm Ahead. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Pendergrast, M. (1993) For God, Country and Coca-Cola: The Unauthorized History of the Great
American Soft Drink and the Company that Makes It. London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson.
Pennycook, A. (1994) The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language. Harlow:
Longman.

PEOPLink (2004) Website of PEOPLink: www.peoplink.org, accessed on 22 October.

Peters, R. (1979) Islam and Colonialism: The Doctrine of Jihad in Modern History. The Hague:
Mouton.

Peterson, V. S. (1992) ‘Transgressing Boundaries: Theories of Knowledge, Gender, and
International Relations’, Millennium, vol. 21, no. 2 (Summer), pp. 183-206.

Peterson, V. S. (2003) A Critical Rewriting of Global Political Economy: Integrating
Reproductive, Productive, and Virtual Economies. London: Routledge.

Peterson, V. S. and A. S. Runyan (1999) Global Gender Issues. Boulder, CO: Westview, 2nd edn.
Petras, J. (1993) ‘Cultural Imperialism in the Late 20th Century’, Journal of Contemporary Asia,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 139-48.

Petras, J. and H. Veltmeyer (2001) Globalization Unmasked: Imperialism in the 21st Century.
London: Zed.

Pettman, J. J. (1996) ‘An International Political Economy of Sex?’ in E. Kofman and G. Youngs
(eds), Globalization: Theory and Practice. London: Pinter, pp. 191-208.



Bibliography 461


Pettman, J. J. (1997) ‘Body Politics: International Sex Tourism’, Third World Quarterly, vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 93-108.

Pettman, R. (2005) ‘Anti-Globalisation Discourses in Asia’, in C. Eschle and B. Maiguashca
(eds), Critical Theories, International Relations and ‘the Anti-Globalisation Movement’.
London: Routledge, pp. 77-86.

Pianta, M. (2001) ‘Parallel Summits of Global Civil Society’, in H. Anheier et al. (eds), Global
Civil Society 2001. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 169-94.

Picciotto, S. (2001) ‘Democratizing Globalism’, in D. Drache (ed.), The Market or the Public
Domain? Global Governance and the Assymmetry of Power. London: Routledge, pp. 335-59.

Piening, C. (1997) Global Europe: The European Union in World Affairs. Boulder, CO:
Rienner.

Pierre, J. (ed.) (2000) Debating Governance: Authority, Steering, and Democracy. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Pietila, H. and J. Vickers (1996) Making Women Matter: The Role of the United Nations
London: Zed, 3rd edition.

Pigman, G. A. (2002) ‘A Multifunctional Case Study for Teaching International Political
Economy: The World Economic Forum as Shar-pei or Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing?’,
International Studies Perspectives, vol. 3, no. 3 (August), pp. 291-309.

Pijl, K. van der (1989) ‘The International Level’, in T. B. Bottomore (ed.), The Capitalist Class:
An International Study. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf, pp. 237-66.

Pijl, K. van der (1998) Transnational Classes and International Relations. London: Routledge.

Piot, C. (1999) Remotely Global: Village Modernity in West Africa. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Pirages, D. (2006) ‘Disease’, in R. Robertson and J. A. Scholte (eds), Encyclopedia of
Globalization. London: Routledge

Ploman, E. W. (1984) Space, Earth and Communication. Westport, CT: Quorum.

Poewe, K. (ed.) (1994) Charismatic Christianity as a Global Culture. Columbia, SC: University
of South Carolina Press.

Pogge, T. W. (2002) World Poverty and Human Rights: Cosmopolitan Responsibilities and
Reforms. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Pogue, Z. (2001) ‘A Look at the First Transatlantic Telesurgery’, accessed at
www.stanford.edu/~zpogue/telemedicine/first.htm.

Poissant, L. (2004) Remarks at joint seminar of the Robarts Centre, York University and the
Canada Research Chair on Globalization, Citizenship and Democracy, University of Quebec
at Montreal, Montreal, 14 May.

Poku, N. K. and A. Whiteside (eds) (2002) ‘Special Issue: Global Health and Governance:
HIV/AIDS’, Third World Quarterly, vol. 23, no. 2 (April).

Polanyi, K. (1944) The Great Transformation. Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1957.

Poovey, M. (1998) A History of the Modern Fact: Problems of Knowledge in the Sciences of
Wealth and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Porta, D. et al. (eds) (1999) Social Movements in a Globalizing World. New York: St. Martin’s.

Porter, G. and J. W. Brown (1996) Global Environmental Politics. Boulder, CO: Westview, 2nd
edn.

Porter, G. et at. (2000) Global Environmental Politics. Boulder, CO: Westview, 3rd edn.

Porter, M. E. (1990) The Competitive Advantage of Nations. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Porter, M. E. (ed.) (1986) Competition in Global Industries. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
School Press.

Porter, T. (1993) States, Markets and Regimes in Global Finance. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Porter, T. (2005) Globalization and Finance. Cambridge: Polity.

Porter, T. and W. Coleman (2002) ‘Transformations in the Private Governance of Global
Finance’, Paper presented at the International Studies Association Annual Convention, New
Orleans, March.

Portes, R. and H. Rey (1999) ‘The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows’, NBER Working
Paper 7336.



462 Bibliography


Poulin, L. (2004) ‘Cellular Telephony and Its Impact on Globalization on the African Continent’,
Center for Global Studies Bulletin (Fall), pp. 5-6

Prakash, A. and J. A. Hart (eds) (1999) Globalization and Governance. London: Routledge.

Pretzlik, C. (2004) ‘FT500: Banking’, Financial Times, 11 May, p. 7.

Price, R. (1998) ‘Reversing the Gun Sights: Transnational Civil Society Targets Land Mines’,
International Organization, vol. 52, no. 3 (Summer), pp. 613-44.

Princen, T. and M. Finger (1994) Environmental NGOs in World Politics: Linking the Local
and the Global. London: Routledge.

Pritchett, L. (1997) ‘Divergence, Big Time’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11, no. 3
(Summer), pp. 3-17.

PTT (1951) Verslag van bet Staatsbedrijf de Posterijen, Telegrafie en Telefonie over het jaar
1950. The Hague: Staatsdrukkerij.

Pucik, V. et al. (eds) (1992) Globalizing Management: Creating and Leading the Competitive
Organization. New York: John Wiley.

Purdy, D. (1997) ‘Social Policy’, in M. J. Arts and N. Lee (eds), The Economics of the European
Union. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2nd edn, pp. 267-91.

Raghavan, C. et al. (1996) ‘Globalisation or Development’, Third World Resurgence, no. 74
(October), pp. 11-34.

Rai, S. M. (2004) ‘Gendering Global Governance’, International Feminist Journal of Politics,
vol. 6, no. 4 (December), pp. 579-601.

Rajora, R. (2001) ‘Gyandoot: Responsive Governance and Equitable Development through
Community Network’. Unpublished paper.

Rajput, P. and H. L. Swarup (eds) (1994) Women and Globalisation: Reflections, Options and
Strategies. New Delhi: Ashish.

Ralston Saul, J. (2004) ‘The End of Globalism’, Harper’s Magazine (February).

Ravenhill, J. F. (2001) APEC and the Construction of Pacific Rim Regionalism. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Raymond, E. S. (1999) The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings on Linux and Open Source by
an Accidental Revolutionary. Cambridge: O’Reilly.

Reed, D. (ed.) (1996) Structural Adjustment, the Environment and Sustainable Development.
London: Earthscan.

Reich, M. R. (ed.) (2002) Public-Private Partnerships for Public Health. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Reinicke, W. H. (1998) Global Public Policy: Governing without Government? Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution.

Reinicke, W. H. (1999-2000) ‘The Other World Wide Web: Global Public Policy Networks’,
Foreign Policy, no. 117 (Winter), pp. 44-57.

Reiser, O. L. and B. Davies (1944) Planetary Democracy: An Introduction to Scientific
Humanism. New York: Creative Age Press.

Rex, J. (1998) ‘Transnational Migrant Communities and the Modern Nation-State’, in R.
Axtmann (ed.), Globalization and Europe: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations.
London: Pinter, pp. 59-76.

Rhedding-Jones, J. (2002) ‘English Elsewhere: Glocalization, Assessment and Ethics’, Journal of
Curriculum Studies, vol. 34, no. 4 (July), pp. 383-404.

Rheingold, H. (1993) The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Rhodes, C. (ed.) (1996) The European Union in the World Community. Boulder, CO:
Rienner.

Rhodes, M. (1996), ‘Globalization and West European Welfare States: A Critical Review of
Recent Debates’, Journal of European Social Policy, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 305-27.

Rhodes, R. A. W. (1997) Understanding Governance: Policy Networks, Governance Reflexivity
and Accountability. Buckingham: Open University Press.

Rich, B. (1994) Mortgaging the Earth: The World Bank, Environmental Impoverishment and
the Crisis of Development. London: Earthscan.



Bibliography 463


Richardson, J. (ed.) (1996) European Union: Power and Policy-Making. London: Routledge.
Richmond, A. H. (1994) Global Apartheid: Refugees, Racism and the New World Order.
Toronto: Oxford University Press.

Richter, J. (2001) Holding Corporations Accountable: Corporate Conduct, International
Codes, and Citizen Action. London: Zed.

Rieger, E. and S. Leibfried (2003) Limits to Globalization: Welfare States and the World
Economy. Cambridge: Polity.

Riezman, R. et al. (2004) ‘Metrics Capturing the Degree to which Individual Economies Are
Globalized’. Paper for the CESifo Venice Summer Institute Workshop on Dissecting
Globalization, 21-22 July.

Rifkin, I. (2003) Spiritual Perspectives on Globalization: Making Sense of Economic and
Cutural Upheaval. Woodstock, VT: Skylight Paths.

Rifkin, J. (1995) The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the
Post-Market Era. New York: Putnam.

Rifkin, J. (1998) The Biotech Century: How Genetic Commerce Will Change the World.
London: Phoenix.

Risse, T. (2000) Remarks to the Annual Conference of the Academic Council on the United
Nations System, Oslo, 18 June.

Ritzer, G. (1995) Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit Card Society. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.

Ritzer, G. (1996) The McDonaldization of Society: An Investigation into the Changing
Character of Contemporary Social Life. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press, rev’d edn.
Rivera, M. et al. (1995) DAWN’s Perspectives on Social Development. Santo Domingo: Center
for Feminist Research and Action.

Robbins, B. (1999) Feeling Global: Internationalism in Distress. New York: New York
University Press.

Roberts, R. (ed.) (1994) Offshore Financial Centres. Cheltenham: Elgar.

Roberts, S. M. (1995) ‘Small Place, Big Money: The Cayman Islands and the International
Financial System’, Economic Geography, vol. 71, no. 3 (July), pp. 237-56.

Robertson, R. (1983) ‘Interpreting Globality’, in World Realities and International Studies
Today. Glenside, PA: Pennsylvania Council on International Education, pp. 7-20.
Robertson, R. (1992) Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture. London: Sage.
Robertson, R. (1995) ‘Globalization: Time-Space and Homogeneity-Heterogeneity’, in M.

Featherstone et al. (eds), Global Modernities. Fondon: Sage, pp. 25-44.

Robertson, R. (2001) ‘Globality’, in N. J. Smelser and P. B. Baltes (eds), International
Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. Oxford: Elsevier/Pergamon, pp. 6254-8.
Robertson, R. and J. Chirico (1985) ‘Humanity, Globalization, and Worldwide Religious
Resurgence: A Theoretical Exploration’, Sociological Analysis, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 219-42.
Robertson, R. and W. R. Garrett (eds) (1991) Religion and Global Order. New York: Paragon
House.

Robertson, R. and J. A. Scholte (eds) (2006) Enclyclopedia of Globalization. London:
Routledge.

Robertson, R. and K. White (eds) (2002) Globalization. London: Routledge, 6 volumes.
Robins, K. and F. Webster (1988) ‘Cybernetic Capitalism, Technology, Everyday Life’, in V.
Mosco and J. Wasko (eds), The Political Economy of Information. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, pp. 44-75.

Robinson, W. I. (1996a) ‘Globalisation: Nine Theses on Our Epoch’, Race &amp; Class, vol. 38, no.
2 (October-December), pp. 13-31.

Robinson, W. I. (1996b) Promoting Polyarchy: Globalization, US Intervention and Hegemony.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Robinson, W.I. and J. Harris (2000) ‘Toward a Global Ruling Class? Globalization and the
Transnational Capitalist Class’, Science and Society, vol 64, no. 1 (Spring), pp. 11-54.
Robotti, P. (2003) ‘The Political Economy of Hedge Fund Regulation’, PhD dissertation,
University of Warwick.



464 Bibliography


Rodrik, D. (1998) ‘Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?’, Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 106, no. 5 (October), pp. 997-1032.

Rodrik, D. (2001) The Global Governance of Trade as if Development Really Mattered. New
York: United Nations Development Programme.

Rohwer, J. (1992) ‘China: The Titan Stirs’, The Economist, vol. 325, no. 7787 (28 November),
Supplement.

Ronit, K. and V. Schneider (eds) (2000) Private Organizations in Global Politics. London:
Routledge.

Rosamond, B. (2000) Theories of European Integration. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rosecrance, R. (1995) ‘The Obsolescence of Territory’, N ew Perspectives Quarterly, vol. 12,no.
1, pp. 44-50.

Rosenau, J. N. (1980) The Study of Global Interdependence: Essays on the Transnationalization
of World Affairs. London: Pinter.

Rosenau, J. N. (1990) Turbulence in World Politics: A Theory of Change and Continuity.
Princeton, MJ: Princeton University Press.

Rosenau, J. N. (1997) Along the Domestic-Foreign Frontier: Exploring Governance in a
Turbulent World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Rosenau, J. N. (2003) Distant Proximities: Dynamics beyond Globalization. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Rosenau, J. N. and E.-O. Czempiel (eds) (1992) Governance without Government: Order and
Change in World Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Rosenberg, J. (2001) The Follies of Globalization Theory: Polemical Essays. London: Verso.
Rosenberg, J. (2005) ‘Globalization Theory - A Post Mortem’, International Politics, vol. 42, no.
1 (Spring), pp. 2-74.

Rowbotham, S. and S. Linkogle (2001) Women Resist Globalization: Mobilizing for
Livelihoods and Rights. London: Zed.

Rozendaal, G. van (2002) Trade Unions and Global Governance: The Quest of Trade Unions
for a Social Clause. London: Continuum.

Rubenstein, C. (1991) ‘The Flying Silver Message Stick: Update 1985-86 on Long Songs
Collected 1971-74’, Sarawak Museum Journal, vol. 42, No. 63 (new series), pp. 61-157.
Rudra, N. (2002) ‘Globalization and the Decline of the Welfare State in Less-Developed
Countries’, International Organization, vol. 56, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 411-45.

Ruggie, J. G. (1993) ‘Territoriality and Beyond: Problematizing Modernity in International
Relations’, International Organization, vol. 47, no. 1 (Winter), pp. 139-74.

Ruggie, J. G. (1998) Constructing the World Polity: Essays in International Institutionalization.
London: Routledge.

Rugman, A. (2001) The End of Globalization. London: Random House Business Books.
Rugman, A. M. and A. Verbeke (1990) Global Corporate Strategy and Trade Policy. London:
Routledge.

Ruigrok, W. and R. van Tulder (1995) The Logic of International Restructuring: the
Management of Dependencies in Rival Industrial Complexes. London: Routledge.

Riiland, J. et al. (eds) (2002) Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC): The First Decade.
London: Routledge Curzon.

Riiland, J. et al. (eds) (forthcoming) Interregionalism in a Globalized World.

Runyan, A. S. (1996) ‘The Places of Women in Trading Places: Gendered Global/Regional
Regimes and Inter-nationalized Feminist Resistance’, in E. Kofman and G. Youngs (eds),
Globalization: Theory and Practice. London: Pinter, pp. 238-52.

Rupert, M. (2000) Ideologies of Globalization: Contending Visions of a New World Order.
London: Routledge.

Rupert, M. and H. Smith (eds) (2002) Historical Materialism and Globalization. London:
Routledge.

Ruse, M. and D. Castle (eds) (2002) Genetically Modified Foods: Debating Biotechnology.
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.



Bibliography 465


Sack, R. (1986) Human Territoriality: Its Theory and History. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Said, E. W. (1978) Orientalism. New York: Random House.

Sakamoto, Y. (1997) Sotaika no Jidai [‘The Age of Relativization’]. Tokyo: Iwanami Shinso.

Salamon, L. M. (1994) ‘The Rise of the Nonprofit Sector’, Foreign Affairs, vol. 73, no. 4
(July-August), pp. 109-22.

Salcedo, R. (2003) ‘When the Global Meets the Local at the Mall’, American Behavioral
Scientist, vol. 46, no. 8 (April), pp. 1084-103.

Salter, L. (1999) ‘The Standards Regime for Communication and Information Technologies’, in
A. C. Cutler et al. (eds), Private Authority in International Affairs. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, pp. 97-127.

Sampson, G. P. (ed.) (2001) The Role of the WTO in Global Governance. Tokyo: United
Nations University Press.

Sandbrook, R. (ed.) (2003) Civilizing Globalization. Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press.

Sander, H. (1996) ‘Multilateralism, Regionalism and Globalisation: The Challenges to the
World Trading System’, in H. Sander and A. Inotai (eds), World Trade after the Uruguay
Round: Prospects and Policy Options for the Twenty-First Century. London: Routledge, pp.
17-36.

SAPRI (2004) Website of the Structural Adjustment Policy Review Initiative, www.world-
bank.org/research/sapri/, accessed on 19 January.

SAPRIN (2004) Website of the Structural Adjustment Policy Review International Network:
www.saprin.org/, accessed on 19 January.

Sassen, S. (1997) Losing Control? Sovereignty in an Age of Globalization. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Sassen, S. (2001) The Global City: Netv York, London, Tokyo. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2nd edn.

Sassen, S. (ed.) (2002) Global Networks, Linked Cities. London: Routledge.

Saunders, J. (1989) Across Frontiers: International Support for the Miners’ Strike of 1984-85.
London: Canary.

Sauvant, K. P. and H. Hasenpflug (eds) (1977) The New International Economic Order:
Confrontation or Cooperation betiveen North and South? Boulder, CO: Westview.

Schafer, W. (2005) ‘The Uneven Globality of Children’, Journal of Social History, vol. 38, no. 4
(Summer).

Schafer, W. et al. (2003) ‘The New Global History: Toward a Narrative for Pangaea Two’,
Erwdgen Wissen Ethik, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 75-135.

Schechter, M. G. (ed.) (1999a) Future Multilateralism: The Political and Social Framework.
Tokyo: United Nations University Press.

Schechter, M. G. (ed.) (1999b) Innovation in Multilateralism. Tokyo: United Nations University
Press.

Schiller, D. (1999) Digital Capitalism: Netivorking the Global Market System. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Schiller, H. I. (1991) ‘Not Yet the Post-Imperialist Era’, Critical Studies in Mass Communication,
vol. 8, no. 1 (March), pp. 13-28.

Schiller, H. I. and A. R. Schiller (1988) ‘Libraries, Public Access to Information, and Commerce’,
in V. Mosco and J. Wasko (eds), The Political Economy of Information. Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press, pp. 146-66.

Schmidt, R. (1999) A Feasible Foreign Exchange Transaction Tax. Ottawa: North-South
Institute.

Schmidt, V. A. (1995) ‘The New World Order, Incorporated: The Rise of Business and the
Decline of the Nation-State’, Daedalus, vol. 124, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 75-106.

Scholte, J. A. (1993) International Relations of Social Change. Buckingham: Open University
Press.



466 Bibliography


Scholte, J. A. (1995) ‘The International Construction of Indonesian Nationhood, 1930-1950’,
in H. Antlov and S. Tonnesson (eds), Imperial Policy and Southeast Asian Nationalism
1930-1957. London: Curzon, pp. 191-226.

Scholte, J. A. (1996) ‘The Geography of Collective Identities in a Globalizing World’, Review of
International Political Economy, vol. 3, no. 4 (Winter), pp. 565-607.

Scholte, J. A. (1997) ‘Global Capitalism and the State’, International Affairs, vol. 73, no. 3 (July),
pp. 427-52.

Scholte, J. A. (1999) ‘Security and Community in a Globalizing World: African Experiences’, in
C. Thomas and P. Wilkin (eds), Globalization, Human Security, and the African Experience.
Boulder, CO: Rienner, pp. 59-84.

Scholte, J. A. (2000) ‘Global Civil Society’, in N. Woods (ed.). The Political Economy of
Globalization. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 173-201.

Scholte, J. A. (2001) ‘The Globalization of World Politics’, in J. Baylis and S. Smith (eds), The
Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2nd edn, pp. 13-32.

Scholte, J. A. (2002a) ‘Civil Society and Governance in the Global Polity’, in M. Ougaard and R.
Higgott (eds), Towards a Global Polity. London: Routledge, pp. 145-65.

Scholte, J. A. (2002b) Civil Society Voices and the International Monetary Fund. Ottawa:
North-South Institute.

Scholte, J. A. (2002c) ‘Governing Global Finance’, in D. Held and A. McGrew (eds),
Governing Globalization: Poiver, Authority and Global Governance. Cambridge: Polity,
pp. 189-208.

Scholte, J. A. (2003) The Sources of Neoliberal Globalisation. Geneva: United Nations Research
Institute for Social Development (UNRISD), online at: www.unrisd.org.

Scholte, J. A. (2004a) ‘Civil Society and Democratically Accountable Global Governance’,
Government and Opposition, vol. 39, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 211-33.

Scholte, J. A. (2004b) Democratizing the Global Economy? The Role of Civil Society. Coventry:
Centre for the Study of Globalization and Regionalization, online at: www.csgr.org/
research/publications.

Scholte, J. A. (2004c) ‘Globalisation Studies Past and Future: A Dialogue of Diversity’,
Globalizations, vol. l,no. 1 (September), pp. 102-10.

Scholte, J. A. (2004d) ‘The WTO and Civil Society’, in B. Hocking and S. McGuire (eds), Trade
Politics: International, Domestic and Regional Perspectives. London: Routledge, 2nd edn,
pp. 146-61.

Schreiter, R. J. (1997) The New Catholicity: Theology between the Global and the Local.
Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

Schrijver, N. J. (1997) Sovereignty over Natural Resources: Balancing Rights and Duties.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schulz, M. et al. (eds) (2001) Regionalization in a Globalizing World: A Comparative
Perspective on Forms, Actors and Processes. London: Zed.

Schwab, K. and C. Smadja (1996) ‘Start Taking the Backlash against Globalization Seriously’,
International Herald Tribune, 2 February.

Scott, H. S. and P. A. Wellons (2000) International Finance: Transactions, Policy and
Regulation. New York: Foundation Press.

Segal, G. (1994) China Changes Shape: Regionalism and Foreign Policy. London: International
Institute of Strategic Studies.

Segerstrom, P. (2003) ‘Naomi Klein and the Anti-Globalization Movement’, in M. Lundahl
(ed.), Globalization and Its Enemies. Stockholm: EFI Economic Research Institute,
Stockholm School of Economics, pp._.

Sen, J. et al. (eds) (2004) World Social Forum: Challenging Empires. New Delhi: Viveka
Foundation.

Seoane, J. andE. Taddei (eds) (2001) Resistencias mundiales (De Seattle a Porto Alegre) [‘Global
Resistance (From Seattle to Porto Alegre)’]. Buenos Aires: Consejo Latinamericano de
Ciencias Sociales.



Bibliography 467


Sgard, J. (2004) IMF in Theory: Sovereign Debts, Judicialisation and Multilateralism. Paris:
Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales, Working Paper 2004-21,
December.

Shakespeare, W. (1595-6) A Midsummer Night’s Dream (ed. H. F. Brooks). London: Methuen,
1979.

Shapiro, C. and H. R. Varian (1999) Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Netivork
Economy. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Shapiro, M. J. (1994) ‘Moral Geographies and the Ethics of Post-Sovereignty’, Public Culture,
vol. 6, no. 3 (Spring), pp. 479-502.

Shapiro, M. J. and H. R. Alker (1996) Challenging Boundaries: Global Flows, Territorial
Identities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Shaw, M. (1994) Global Society and International Relations: Sociological Concepts and
Political Perspectives. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Shaw, M. (1997) ‘The State of Globalization: Toward a Theory of State Transformation’,
Review of International Political Economy, vol. 4, no. 3 (Autumn), pp. 497-513.

Shaw, M. (2000) Theory of the Global State: Globality as Unfinished Revolution. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Shaw, M. (ed.) (1984) War, State and Society. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Shaw, M. (ed.) (1999) Politics and Globalisation: Knowledge, Ethics and Agency. London:
Routledge.

Shaw, T. M. (2004) ‘The Commonwealth(s) and Global Governance’, Global Governance, vol.

10, no. 4 (October-December), pp. 499-516.

Shearer, D. (1998) ‘Outsourcing War ’, Foreign Policy, no. 112 (Fall), pp. 68-81.

Shelley, L. I. (1995) ‘Transnational Organized Crime: an Imminent Threat to the Nation-State?’,
Journal of International Affairs, vol. 48, no. 2 (Winter), pp. 463-89.

Shin, D. C. (1994) ‘On the Third Wave of Democratization: A Synthesis and Evaluation of
Recent Research and Theory’, World Politics, vol. 47, no. 1 (October), pp. 135-70.

Shiva, V. (1997) Biopiracy: the Plunder of Nature and Knowledge. Boston, MA: South End
Press.

Short, J. R. (2001) Global Dimensions: Space, Place and the Contemporary World. London:
Reaktion Books.

Shuman, M. H. (2000) Going Local: Creating Self-Reliant Communities in a Global Age. New
York: Routledge.

Signs (2001) ‘Globalization and Gender’, Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, vol.
26, no. 4 (Summer).

Silver, B. (2003) Forces of Labour: Workers Movements and Globalisation since 1870.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Silver, B. J. and G. Arrighi (2003) ‘Polanyi’s “Double Movement”: The Belle Epoques of British
and U.S. Hegemony Compared’, Politics &amp; Society, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 325-55.

Simai, M. (1995) ‘The Politics and Economics of Global Employment’ in M. Simai (ed.), Global
Employment: an International Investigation into the Future of Work, Volume 1. London:
Zed, pp. 3-29.

Simmons, P. J. and C. de Jonge Oudraat (eds) (2001) Managing Global Issues: Lessons Learned.

Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

Simonson, K. (2006) ‘World Economic Forum’, in R. Robertson and J. A. Scholte (eds),
Encyclopedia of Globalization. London: Routledge.

Simpson, J. (1988) Behind Iranian Lines. London: Fontana, 1989.

Sinclair, T. J. (2005) The New Masters of Capital: American Bond Rating Agencies and the
Global Economy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Singer, H. W. (1995) ‘An Historical Perspective’, in M. ul Haq et al. (eds), The UN and the
Bretton Woods Institutions: New Challenges for the Twenty-First Century. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 17-25.

Singer, P. (1972) ‘Famine, Affluence and Morality’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, vol. 1, no. 2
(Spring), pp. 229-43.



468 Bibliography


Singer, P. (2002) One World: The Ethics of Globalization. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.

Singer, P. W. (2003) Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.

Sklair, L. (1995) Sociology of the Global System. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 2nd
edn.

Sklair, L. (2001) The Transnational Capitalist Class. Oxford: Blackwell.

Skrobanek, S. et al. (1997) The Traffic in Women: Human Realities of the International Sex
Trade. London: Zed.

Slaughter, A.-M. (2000) ‘Government Networks: The Heart of the Liberal Democratic Order’,
in G.H. Fox and B.R. Roth (eds), Democratic Governance and International Law.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 199-235.

Slaughter, A.-M. (2004) A New World Order. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Smart, B. (1999) Facing Modernity: Ambivalence, Reflexivity and Morality. London: Sage.
Smillie, I. (1999) ‘At Sea in a Sieve? Trends and Issues in the Relationship between Northern
NGOs and Northern Governments’, in I. Smillie and H. Helmich (eds), Stakeholders:
Government-NGO Partnerships for International Development. London: Earthscan.
Smith, A. (1776) The Wealth of Nations. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970.

Smith, A. D. (1990a) ‘The Supersession of Nationalism?’, International Journal of Comparative
Sociology, vol. 31, no. 1-2 (January-April), pp. 1-31.

Smith, A. D. (1990b) ‘Towards a Global Culture?’ in M. Featherstone (ed.), Global Culture:

Nationalism, Globalization and Modernity. London: Sage, pp. 171-91.

Smith, A. D. (1995) Nations and Nationalism in a Global Era. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Smith, J. and H. Johnston (eds) (2002) Globalization and Resistance: Transnational Dimensions
of Social Movements. Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.

Smith, J. et al. (eds) (1997) Transnational Social Movements and Global Politics: Solidarity
beyond the State. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.

Smith, M. P. and L. E. Guarnizo (eds) (1998) Transnationalism from Below. New Brunswick,
NJ: Transaction.

Smouts, M.-C. (1999) ‘Multilateralism from Below: A Prerequisite for Global Governance’, in
M. G. Schechter (ed.), Future Multilateralism: the Political and Social Framework. Tokyo:
United Nations University Press, pp. 292-311.

Smythe, E. (2000) ‘State Authority and Investment Security: Non-State Actors and the
Negotiation of the Multilateral Agreement on Investment at the OECD’, in R. A. Higgott et
al. (eds), Nonstate Actors and Authority in the Global System. London: Routledge, pp.
74-90.

Snell-Hornby, M. (2000) ‘Communicating in the Global Village: On Language, Translation and
Cultural Identity’, in C. Schaffner (ed.), Translation in the Global Village. Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters, pp. 11-28.

Sodersten, B. (2004) (ed.) Globalization and the Welfare State. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Sopa, V. (2002) Peasant activist in North East Thailand, interviewed by the author in Bangkok
on 10 June.

Sorensen, G. (1999) ‘Sovereignty: Change and Continuity in a Fundamental Institution’,
Political Studies, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 590-604.

Sorensen, G. (2004) The Transformation of the State: Beyond the Myth of Retreat. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Soroos, M. J. (1986) Beyond Sovereignty: The Challenge of Global Policy. Columbia, SC:
University of South Carolina Press.

Soros, G. (1998) The Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open Society Endangered. London: Little,
Brown.

South Centre (1997) The TRIPS Agreement: A Guide for the South. Geneva: South Centre.
Sparr, P. (ed.) (1994) Mortgaging Women’s Lives: Feminist Critiques of Structural Adjustment.
London: Zed.



Bibliography 4 69


Spero, J. E. (1990) The Politics of International Economic Relations, 4th edn. London: Unwin
Hyman.

Speth, J. G. (1996) ‘Global Inequality: 358 Billionaires vs. 2.3 Billion People’, New Perspectives
Quarterly, vol. 13, no. 4 (Fall), pp. 32-3.

Speth, J. G. (2001) Remarks to the Annual Conference of the Academic Council on the United
Nations System, Puebla.

Spruyt, H. (1994) The Sovereign State and its Competitors: An Analysis of Systems Change.

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Spybey, T. (1996) Globalization and World Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Stalker, P. (2000) Workers without Frontiers: The Impact of Globalization on International
Migration. Boulder, CO: Rienner.

Standing, G. (1999) Global Labour Flexibility: Seeking Redistributive Justice. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Starr, A. (2000) Naming the Enemy: Anti-Corporatist Movements Confront Globalization.
London: Zed.

Starr, A. (2003) ‘Anti-Racism in the North American Anti-Globalization Movement’, in L.

Panitch and C. Leys (eds), Socialist Register. London: Merlin, pp. 265-80.

Starr, A. (2005) Global Revolt: A Guide to the Movement against Globalization. London: Zed.
Staveren, I. van (2002) ‘Global Finance and Gender’, in J. A. Scholte with A. Schnabel (eds), Civil
Society and Global Finance. London: Routledge, pp. 228-46.

St-Denis, J. (2002) International Cooperation Officer of the Unions Central of Quebec (CSQ),
interviewed by the author in Montreal, 1 May.

Steenbergen, B. van (ed.) (1994) The Condition of Citizenship. London: Sage.

Steger, M. B. (ed.) (2004) Rethinking Globalism. Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.

Steger, M. B. (2005) Globalism: Market Ideology Meets Terrorism. Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp;
Littlefield, 2nd edn.

Steinmo, S. (1994) ‘The End of Redistribution? International Pressures and Domestic Tax Policy
Choices’, Challenge (November-December), pp. 9-17.

Stern, P. C. et al. (eds) (1992) Global Environmental Change: Understanding the Human
Dimensions. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Stewart, F. and A. Berry (2000) ‘Globalization, Liberalization and Inequality: Real Causes,
Expectations, and Experience’, Challenge, vol. 43, no. 1 (January-February), pp. 44-92.
Stienstra, D. (1994) Women’s Movements and International Organizations. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Stiglitz, J. (1998) More Instruments and Broader Goals: Moving toward the Post-Washington
Consensus. Helsinki: United Nations World Institute for Development Economics Research
Annual Lectures, 7 January.

Stiglitz, J. (2002) Globalization and Its Discontents. New York: Norton.

Stokhof, W. and P. van der Velde (eds) (1999) ASEM: The Asia—Europe Meeting. A Window of
Opportunity. London: Kegan Paul.

Stone, D. (2004) ‘Transfer Agents and Global Networks in the “Transnationalisation” of
Policy’, Journal of European Public Policy, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 545-66.

Stopford, J. M. and S. Strange (1991) Rival States, Rival Firms: Competition for World Market
Shares. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Storey, D. (2001) Territory: The Claiming of Space. Harlow: Prentice Hall.

Strange, S. (1986) Casino Capitalism. Oxford: Blackwell.

Strange, S. (1994) States and Markets. London: Pinter, 2nd edn.

Strange, S. (1996) The Retreat of the State: the Diffusion of Power in the World Economy.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Strange, S. (1998) Mad Money. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Strassoldo, R. (1992) ‘Globalism and Localism: Theoretical Reflections and Some Evidence’, in
Z. Mlinar (ed.), Globalization and Territorial Identities. Aldershot: Avebury.

Stryker, R. (1998) ‘Globalization and the Welfare State’, International Journal of Sociology and
Social Policy, vol. 18, no. 2/3/4, pp. 1-49.



470 Bibliography


Suarez Aguilar, E. (1999) personal communication to the author, Mexico City, June.

Suganami, H. (1978) ‘A Note on the Origin of the Word “International” ’, British Journal of
International Studies, vol. 4, no. 3 (October), pp. 226-32.

Sulak Sivaraksa (1999) Global Healing: Essays and Interviews on Structural Violence, Social
Development and Spiritual Transformation. Bangkok: Sathirakoses-Nagapradipa Foundation.

Sullivan, S. (1997) From War to Wealth: Fifty Years of Innovation. Paris: Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development.

Sutcliffe, B. (1998) ‘Freedom to Move in the Age of Globalization’, in D. Baker et al. (eds),
Globalization and Progressive Economic Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 325-36.

Sutcliffe, B. (2002) A More or Less Unequal World? World Income Distribution in the 20th
Century. Bilbao, Spain: Universidad del Pais Vasco, Hegoa, Working Paper No. 31.

Sutcliffe, B. and A. Glyn (2003) ‘Measures of Globalisation and Their Misinterpretation’, in J.
Michie (ed.), The Handbook of Globalisation. Cheltenham: Elgar, pp. 61-78.

Swank, D. (1998) ‘Funding the Welfare State: Globalization and the Taxation of Business in
Advanced Market Economies’, Political Studies, vol. 46, no. 4 (September), pp. 671-92.

Swank, D. (2002) Global Capital, Political Institutions, and Policy Change in Developed
Welfare States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sweezy, P. and H. Magdoff (1985) ‘The Strange Recovery of 1983-1984’, Monthly Review, vol.
37, no. 5 (October), pp. 1-11.

SWIFT (2005) Website of the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications,
http://www.swift.com, accessed on 24 January.

Tabb, W.K. (2001) The Amoral Elephant: Globalization and the Struggle for Social Justice in the
Twenty-First Century. New York: Monthly Review Press.

Tanner, S. (1997) ‘Healing the Sky to Survive Globalization: a Gender Analogy’, in T. Schrecker
(ed.), Surviving Globalism: The Social and Environmental Challenges. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, pp. 141-57.

Tanzi, V. (1996) ‘Globalization, Tax Competition and the Future of Tax Systems’, IMF Working
Paper Series, WP/96/141.

Tanzi, V. (2000) Globalization, Technological Developments, and the Work of Fiscal Termites.
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

Taylor, K. (ed.) (1975) Henri Saint-Simon (1760-1825): Selected Writings on Science, Industry
and Social Organisation. London: Croom Helm.

Taylor, P. J. (2000) ‘Izations of the World: Americanization, Modernization and Globalization’,
in C. Hay and D. Marsh (eds), Demystifying Globalization. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, pp. 49-70.

Taylor, P. J. etal. (1996) ‘On the Nation-State, the Global, and Social Science’, Environment and
Planning A, vol. 28, no. 11 (November), pp. 1917-95.

Taylor, R. (2004) Creating a Better World: Interpreting Global Civil Society. Bloomfield, CT:
Kumarian.

Taylor, T. (1997) Global Pop: World Music, World Markets. London: Routledge.

Taylor, W. C. and A. M. Weber (1996) Going Global: Four Entrepreneurs Map the New World
Marketplace. New York: Viking.

Tchistiakov, G. (2002) Priest in the Russian Orthodox Church, interviewed by the author in
Moscow, 14 January.

TCO (2001) Website of the Transnational Corporations Observatory, www.transnationale.org,
accessed on 29 October.

Teeple, G. (1995) Globalization and the Decline of Social Reform. Atlantic Highlands, NJ:
Humanities Press.

Teitelbaum, B. (2001) personal communication to the author, Brisbane, Australia, 2-4 October.

Teivanen, T. (2002) ‘The World Social Forum and Global Democratisation: Learning from
Porto Alegre’, Third World Quarterly, vol. 23, no. 4 (August), pp. 621-32.

Teschke, B. (2003) The Myth of 1648: Class, Geopolitics, and the Making of Modern
International Relations. London: Verso.



Bibliography 471


Thomas, C. and P. Wilkin (eds) (1997) Globalization and the South. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Thomas, C. and P. Wilkin (eds) (1999) Globalization, Human Security, and the African
Experience. Boulder, CO: Rienner.

Thomas, D. (1999) Presentation by David Thomas of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi to the Global Forum on
Poverty Eradication, Council of Europe, Strasbourg, 15 October.

Thompson, D. (1999) ‘Democratic Theory and Global Society’, Journal of Political Philosophy,
vol. 7, no. 2 (June), pp. 111-25.

Thomson, J. E. and S. D. Krasner (1989) ‘Global Transactions and the Consolidation of
Sovereignty’, in E.-O. Czempiel and J. N. Rosenau (eds), Global Changes and Theoretical
Challenges. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, pp. 195-220.

Thorne, C. (1992) ‘American Political Culture and the End of the Cold War Journal of
American Studies, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 303-30.

Thrift, N. (1996) Spatial Formations. London: Sage.

Tilly, C. (1990) Coercion, Capital, and European States, AD 990-1990. Oxford: Blackwell.

Tilly, C. (1995) ‘Globalization Threatens Labor’s Rights’, International Labor and Working
Class History, no. 47 (Spring), pp. 1-23.

Time Warner (2004) TimeWarner 2003 Annual Report. New York: Time Warner, Inc.

Tober, D. (1993) ‘One World - One Vision for Business’, in S. Bushrui etal. (eds), Transition to
a Global Society. Oxford: Oneworld, pp. 98-107.

Toffler, A. (1980) The Third Wave. London: Collins.

Toffler, A. and H. Toffler (1994) Creating a New Civilization: The Politics of the Third Wave.
Atlanta: Turner.

Tomlinson, J. (1991) Cultural Imperialism: A Critical Introduction. London: Pinter.

Tomlinson, J. (1995) ‘Homogenisation and Globalisation’, History of European Ideas, vol. 20,
nos 4-6 (February), pp. 891-7.

Tomlinson, J. (1999) Globalization and Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Torpey, J. C. (2000) The Invention of the Passport: Surveillance, Citizenship, and the State.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Toynbee, A. (1948) Civilisation on Trial. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Treadgold, A. (1993) ‘Cross-Border Retailing in Europe: Present Status and Future Prospects’, in
H. Cox et al. (eds), The Growth of Global Business. London: Routledge, pp. 119-35.

Trogrlic, J. F. (2001) National Secretary of the French Democratic Labour Confederation
(CFDT), interviewed by the author in Paris on 10 December.

Turgot, A. R. J. (1750) ‘A Philosophical Review of the Successive Advances of the Human Mind’,
in R. L. Meek (ed.), Turgot on Progress, Sociology and Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1973, pp. 41-59.

Udall, L. (1998) ‘The World Bank and Public Accountability: Has Anything Changed?’, in J. A.
Fox and L. D. Brown (eds), The Struggle for Accountability: The World Bank, NGOs and
Grassroots Movements. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 391-436

UGI (1999) Money across Frontiers: The Explosion of Global Finance. Cheltenham:
Understanding Global Issues 99/3.

UIA (1998) Yearbook of International Organizations 1998/99, Vol. 1. Munich: Saur/Union of
International Associations.

UIA (2001) Yearbook of International Organizations 2001/2002, Volume 5. Munich:
Saur/Union of International Associations.

ul Haq, M. et al. (eds) (1995) The UN and the Bretton Woods Institutions: New Challenges for
the Twenty-First Century. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

UMU (2003) Comment to the author from a student at Uganda Martyrs University, Nkozi, 3
September.

UN (1997) World Economic and Social Survey 1997. New York: United Nations.

UN (2000) Millennium Declaration. New York: United Nations.

UN (2002) International Migration Report. New York: United Nations Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, online at: www.un.org/esa/population/publications.



472 Bibliography


UNCTAD (1994) World Investment Report 1994. Geneva: United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development.

UNCTAD (1995) Trade and Development Report 1995. Geneva: United Nations.

UNCTAD (1996) The TRIPS Agreement and Developing Countries. Geneva: United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development.

UNCTAD (2000) Least Developed Countries 1999 Report. Geneva: United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development.

UNCTAD (2001) World Investment Report 2001: Promoting Linkages. Geneva: United Nations.

UNCTAD (2002) World Investment Report 2002 (Overview). Geneva: United Nations.

UNCTAD (2003) Least Developed Countries 2002 Report. Geneva: United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development.

UNCTAD (2004) World Investment Report 2004: The Shift towards Services. Geneva: United
Nations.

UNDP (1998) National Human Development Report 1998: The Russian Federation. Moscow:
United Nations Development Programme.

UNDP (2002) ‘UNDP and Civil Society Organizations: A Policy Note on Engagement’, available
at www.undp.org/mainundp/propoor/civil.htm.

UNESCO (1980) Many Voices, One World. Paris: International Commission for the Study of
Communication Problems, UNESCO.

UNESCO (1987) Women and Media Decision-Making: The Invisible Barriers. Paris: United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation.

UNESCO (1989) World Communication Report. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization.

UNESCO (1999) Statistical Yearbook 1999. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization.

UNESCO (2000) Education for All Year 2000 Assessment: Statistical Document. Paris:
UNESCO Institute for Statistics.

UNHCR (1999) 1998 Global Report. Geneva: United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

UNICEF (1991) The State of the World’s Children 1991. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

UNICEF (1998) The State of the World’s Children 1998. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

UNICEF (2003a) Official Summary: The State of the World’s Children 2004. New York: United
Nations Children’s Fund.

UNICEF (2003b) The State of the World’s Children 2004: Girls, Education and Development.
New York: United Nations Children’s Fund.

UNIFEM (2004) UNIFEM Annual Report 2003/2004. New York: United Nations
Development Fund for Women.

UNPO (1995) The First Three Years 1991—1994. The Hague: Unrepresented Nations and
Peoples Organization. See also http://www.unpo.org.

Urry, J. (2002) The Tourist Gaze. London: Sage, 2nd edn.

Urry, J. (2003) Global Complexity. Cambridge: Polity.

Utting, P. (2006) ‘Corporate Social Responsibility’, in R. Robertson and J.A. Scholte (eds),
Encyclopaedia of Globalization. London: Routledge.

Vandemoortele, J. (2000) Remark of the Chief of Policy Analysis, UNICEF at a meeting of the
Council of Europe attended by the author, 23 June.

Vandenberg, A. (ed.) (2000) Citizenship and Democracy in a Global Era. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Velea, G. (1996) ‘Foreigners in Germany (III)’, Nine O’Clock [Bucharest], No. 1118 (8-10
March), p. 3.

Vertovec, S. and R. Cohen (eds.) (2002) Conceiving Cosmopolitanism: Theory, Context, and
Practice, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

Vickers, J. (1991) Women and the World Economic Crisis. London: Zed.

Victor, D. G. (2004) The Collapse of the Kyoto Protocol and the Struggle to Sloiv Global
Warming. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, rev’d edn.



Bibliography 473


Visa (2003) Website of Visa Corporation, www.visa.com, accessed on 23 August.

Vivarelli, M. (2004) ‘Globalization, Skills and Within-Country Inequality in Developing
Countries’, in E. Lee and M. Vivarelli (eds), Understanding Globalization, Employment, and
Poverty Reduction. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 211-46.

Wachtel, H. (2000) ‘The Mosaic of Global Taxes’, in J. Nederveen Pieterse (ed.), Global Futures:

Shaping Globalization. London: Sage, pp. 99-114.

Wade, R. (1996) ‘Globalization and Its Limits: Reports of the Death of the National Economy
Are Greatly Exaggerated’, in S. Berger and R. Dore (eds), National Diversity and Global
Capitalism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, pp. 60-88.

Wade, R. (2002) Remarks to the conference on ‘Globalization and Inequality’, Centre for the
Study of Globalisation and Regionalisation, University of Warwick, 15 March.

Wade, R. H. (2004) ‘Is Globalization Reducing Poverty and Inequality?’ World Development,
vol. 32, no. 4 (April), pp. 567-89.

Walker, R. B. J. (1991) ‘On the Spatiotemporal Conditions of Democratic Practice’,
Alternatives, vol. 16, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 243-62.

Walker, R .B. J. (1995) ‘International Relations and the Concept of the Political’, in K. Booth and
S. Smith (eds), International Relations Theory. Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 306-27.
Wallace, H. (1996) ‘Politics and Policy in the EU: The Challenge of Governance’, in H. Wallace
and W. Wallace (eds), Policy-Making in the European Union. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 3rd edn, pp. 3-36.

Wallace, H. and W. Wallace (eds) (2000) Policy-Making in the European Union. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 4th edn.

Wallensteen, P. and M. Sollenberg (2000) ‘Armed Conflict 1989-1 999’, Journal of Peace
Research, vol. 37, no. 5 (September), pp. 635-49.

Wallerstein, I. (1974) The Modern World-System, 1: Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of
the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century. New York: Academic Press.
Wallerstein, I. (1979) The Capitalist World-Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Wallerstein, I. (1986) ‘Societal Development, or Development of the World-System?’,
International Sociology, vol. 1 (March), pp. 3-17.

Wallerstein, I. (1991) Unthinking Social Science: The Limits of Nineteenth-Century Paradigms.
Cambridge: Polity Press.

Walton, J. and D. Seddon (1994) Free Markets and Food Riots: The Politics of Global
Adjustment. Oxford: Blackwell.

Wambedde, Z. (2003) staff member of Mental Health Uganda, in conversation with the author,
Mbale, 1 September.

Wang Ning (ed.) (2002) Quanqiuhua yu ivenhua. Xifang yu Zhongguo [‘Globalization and
Culture: West and China’]. Beijing: Peking University Press.

Wapner, P. (1996) Environmental Activism and World Civic Politics. New York: State
University of New York Press.

Warkentin, C. (2001) Reshaping World Politics: NGOs, the Internet, and Global Civil Society.
Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.

Warnier, J.-P. (2003) La mondialisation de la culture [‘The Globalization of Culture’]. Paris:
Editions la Decouverte.

Warren, K. J. (ed.) (1996) Ecological Feminist Philosophies. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.

Warschauer, M. (2002) Technology and Social Inclusion: Rethinking the Digital Divide.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Waterman, P. (1998) Globalization, Social Movements and the New Internationalisms. London:
Mansell.

Waters, M. (1995) Globalization. London: Routledge.

Waters, M. (2001) Globalization. London: Routledge, 2nd edn.

Watson, J. L. (2000) ‘China’s Big Mac Attack’, Foreign Affairs, vol. 79, no. 3 (May-June), pp.
120-34.



474 Bibliography


Watts, S. (1997 ) Epidemics and History: Disease, Power and Imperialism. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.

WCSDG (2004) A Fair Globalization: Creating Opportunities for All. Geneva: International
Labour Organization, World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization.
Weber, E. J. (1977) Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France 1870-1914.
London: Chatto &amp; Windus.

Webster (1961) Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language
Unabridged. Springfield, MA: Merriam.

Webster, D. (1984) ‘Direct Broadcast Satellites: Proximity, Sovereignty and National Identity’,
Foreign Affairs, vol. 62, no. 5 (Summer), pp. 1161-74.

Weiss, L. (1998) The Myth of the Powerless State: Governing the Economy in a Global Era.
Cambridge: Polity.

Weiss, L. (ed.) (2003) States in the Global Economy: Bringing Domestic Institutions Back In.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Weiss, T. G. and L. Gordenker (eds) (1996) NGOs, the UN, and Global Governance. Boulder,
CO: Rienner.

Weiss, T. G. et al. (1994) The United Nations and Changing World Politics. Boulder, CO:
Westview.

Welford, R. (1997) Hijacking Environmentalism: Corporate Responses to Sustainable
Development. London: Earthscan.

Wells, C. (1987) The UN, UNESCO and the Politics of Knowledge. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Wells, H. G. (1938) World Brain. London: Methuen.

Went, R. (1996) Grenzen aan de globalisering ? [‘Limits to Globalization?’] Amsterdam: Het
Spinhuis.

Went, R. (2000) Globalization: Neoliberal Challenge, Radical Responses. London: Pluto.
Whalley, J. (1996) ‘Developing Countries and System Strengthening in the Uruguay Round’, in
W. Martin and L. A. Winters (eds), The Uruguay Round and the Developing Countries.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 409-34.

Whatmore, S. (1994) ‘Global Agro-Food Complexes and the Refashioning of Rural Europe’, in
A. Amin and N. Thrift (eds), Globalization, Institutions, and Regional Development in
Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 46-67.

WHC (2004) Website of the World Heritage Convention, www.whc.unesco.org, accessed on 31
August.

Wheeler, N. J. (2000) Saving Strangers: Humanitarian Intervention in International Society.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Whitfield, P. (1994) The Image of the World: 20 Centuries of World Maps. London: British Library.
WHO (2001) ‘Special Theme: Globalization’, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol.
79, no. 9, pp. 802-4, 827-93.

Wichterich, C. (2000) The Globalized Woman: Reports from a Future of Inequality. London:
Zed.

Wiener, J. (1999) Globalization and the Harmonization of Law. London: Pinter.

Wilde, R. (2001) ‘From Danzig to East Timor and Beyond: The Role of International Territorial
Administration’, American Journal of International Law, vol. 95, no. 3 (July), pp. 583-606.
Willetts, P. (ed.) (1996) ‘Conscience of the World’: The Influence of Non-Governmental
Organisations in the UN System. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Williams, G. (2001) ‘Megalomedia: The Voice of Globalization’, New Internationalist, No. 333
(April), available at www.newint.org/, accessed on 1 February 2005.

Williams, M. (1996) ‘Rethinking Sovereignty’, in E. Kofmanand G. Youngs (eds) Globalization:

Theory and Practice. London: Pinter, pp. 109-22.

Williams, P. (1994) ‘Transnational Criminal Organisations and International Security’,
Survival, vol. 36, no. 1 (Spring), pp. 96-113.

Williams, P. (2000) Remarks to the Annual Conference of the Academic Council on the United
Nations System, Oslo, 18 June.



Bibliography 475


Williamson, J. (1990) ‘What Washington Means by Policy Reform’, in J. Williamson (ed.), Latin
American Adjustment: How Much Has Happened s’ Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics, pp. 7-20.

Williamson, J. (1997) ‘The Washington Consensus Reassessed’, in L. Emmerij (ed.), Economic
and Social Development into the XXI Century. Washington, DC: Inter-American
Development Bank, pp. 48-61.

Williamson, J. (1999) Lecture at University of Warwick by John Williamson, Chief Economist,
South Asia Region, the World Bank, 3 February.

Willkie, W. L. (1943) One World. London: Cassell.

Wills, J.E. (2001) 1688: A Global History. New York: Norton.

Wilmer, F. (1993) The Indigenous Voice in World Politics: Since Time Immemorial. London: Sage.

Wilson, E. O. (ed.) (1988) Biodiversity. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Winslow, A. (ed.) (1995) Women, Politics, and the United Nations. Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Wirtz, J. J. and J. A. Larsen (eds) (2001) Rocket’s Red Glare: Missile Defenses and the Future of
World Politics. Boulder, CO: Westview.

Wood, A. (1994) North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality: Changing Fortunes in a
Skill-Driven World. Oxford: Clarendon.

Wood, D. (2005) Governing Global Banking: The Basel Committee and the Politics of Financial
Globalisation. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Wood, S. et al. (2003) The Social and Economic Challenges of Nanotechnology. Swindon:
Economic and Social Research Council.

Woolf, V. (1938) Three Guineas. London: Hogarth.

World Bank (1992) Export Processing Zones. Washington, DC: World Bank Industry and
Development Division.

World Bank (1994) World Debt Tables 1994-95: External Finance for Developing Countries.
Volume 1. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (1996) Annual Report 1996. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (1997) World Development Report 1997: the State in a Changing World. New
York: Oxford University Press.

World Bank (2000) Consultations with Civil Society Organizations: General Guidelines for
World Bank Staff. Washington, DC: World Bank, NGO and Civil Society Unit.

World Bank (2001) World Development Report 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty. New York:
Oxford University Press.

World Bank (2002) World Development Report 2002: Building Institutions for Markets. New
York: Oxford University Press.

World Bank (2004) World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People.
New York: Oxford University Press.

World Bank (2005) World Development Report 2005: A Better Investment Climate for
Everyone. New York: Oxford University Press.

Wriston, W. B. (1992) The Twilight of Sovereignty: How the Information Revolution Is
Transforming Our World. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.

WTO-1 (1991) Current Travel and Tourism Indicators. Madrid: World Tourism Organization.

WTO-1 (2002) Website of the World Tourism Organization, www.world-tourism.org/
market_research/facts&amp;figures/menu.htm.

WTO-2 (1996a) Annual Report 1996, Volume I. Geneva: World Trade Organization.

WTO-2 (1996b) ‘Ruggiero Calls for Trading System to be Kept in Line with Globalization
Process’. World Trade Organization press release, 22 February.

WTO-2 (2002) Annual Report 2002. Geneva: World Trade Organization.

WTTC (2005) Website of the World Travel &amp; Tourism Council, http://www.wttc.org/, accessed
on 3 February.

Wurm, S. A. (ed.) (1996) Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger of Disappearing. Paris:
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation.

Yeates, N. (1999), ‘Social Politics and Policy in an Era of Globalization: Critical Reflections’,
Social Policy &amp; Administration, vol. 33, no. 4 (December), pp. 372-93.



476 Bibliography


Yeates, N. (2001) Globalization and Social Policy. London: Sage.

Yeates, N. (2004) ‘Global Care Chains: Critical Reflections and Lines of Enquiry’, International
Feminist Journal of Politics, vol. 6, no. 3 (September), pp. 369-91.

Young, O. R. et al. (eds) (1996) Global Environmental Change and International Governance.

Hanover, NH: University Press of New England.

Young, P. (1991) Person to Person: The International Impact of the Telephone. Cambridge:
Granta.

Yuen, E. et al. (eds) (2001) The Battle of Seattle: The New Challenge to Capitalist Globalization.
New York: Soft Skull.

Zadek, S. (2001) The Civil Corporation: The New Economy of Corporate Citizenship. London:
Earthscan.

Zadek, S. et al. (eds) (1997) Building Corporate Account Ability: Emerging Practices in Social
and Ethical Accounting, Auditing and Reporting. London: Earthscan.

Zakaria, F. (1997) ‘The Rise of Illiberal Democracy’, Foreign Affairs, vol. 76, no. 6
(November/December), pp. 22-43.

Zarate, J. C. (1998) ‘The Emergence of a New Dog of War: Private International Security
Companies, International Law, and the New World Disorder’, Stanford Journal of
International Law, vol. 34, no. 1 (Winter), pp. 75-162.

Zevin, R. (1992) ‘Are Financial Markets More Open? If So, Why and with What Effects?’ in T.
Banuri and J.B. Schor (eds), Financial Openness and National Autonomy: Opportunities and
Constraints. Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 43-83.

Zolo, D. (1997) Cosmopolis: Prospects for World Government. Cambridge: Polity.

Zubiri, A. U. (1999) ‘The International Relations of Basque Nationalism and the First Basque
Autonomous Government (1890-1939)’, in F. Aldecoa and M. Keating (eds),
Paradiplomacy in Action: The Foreign Relations of Subnational Governments. London:
Frank Cass, pp. 170-84.

Zumthor, P. (1993) La mesure du monde. Representation de I’espace au Moyen Age [‘The Scale
of the World: Representation of Space in the Middle Ages’]. Paris: Seuil.

Zysman, J. (1996) ‘The Myth of a “Global” Economy: Enduring National Foundations and
Emerging Regional Realities’, New Political Economy, vol. 1, no. 2 (June), pp. 157-84.



Index


accountability, 35, 43, 349, 353-4, 361,
363, 365-7, 369-71, 380-1, 398,
410,413-17

accounting, 137,145,183, 216, 252,
296

see also global accounting
acid rain, 30, 72, 75, 100,114
advertising, 68-9, 80, 92, 94,163,165,
178,271
aeroplane, 20

aesthetics, 5,150, 256-7, 273-4, 387
African National Congress, 232
African Union, 236, 282, 398
age, xviii, 6-7,14-15, 18, 46, 73, 83,
116,149,197,220,225-6,232,
239,252,278, 305, 316-17, 319,
340, 342-3, 345, 351, 378-9, 409,
413,421

see also children, elderly, youth
agent-structure problem, 21, 47, 83,
122-3,157,269,383
aid, see official development assistance
AIDS, 31, 72-3, 91,209,219,225,250,
279-80,288-9, 331,399
air travel, 20, 41, 43, 62, 64, 68 69, 71,
76, 79, 82, 93,95,98,100,104,
107-8, 117-18, 125, 142,144,

164,177,180,182,199,204, 209,
216,219, 235,238,245-6,252,
268,270,272-3,280,283-4, 286,
311,323,336,398,406
A1 Qaida, 71

alter-globalization, 41, 219, 382-423
alternative trade schemes, 220, 332,
404,408

American Telephone &amp; Telegraph
Company (AT&amp;T), see AT&amp;T
Americanization, 16, 26, 32, 53, 58, 80,

245.250, 306

Amnesty International, 215, 243, 250,
259

anarchism, 38, 45,154, 259, 394-5
Andean pact, 207
Andorra, government of, 203
Antarctica, 211

anti-globalization movement, 40-1, 54,

56.219.221.247.250, 311, 381


anti-trust policy, 42-3,183, 210, 390,
405,421-2

apartheid, 35,194, 206, 234, 243, 247,
249, 343-4, 374
see also global apartheid
arbitration, 215-16
Argentina, government of, 203
arms control, 72, 219, 282-3, 312, 378,
390,397,422

Asia-Europe Meetings (ASEM), 207
Asian financial crisis, 198,209,211,
292-4,329,333,343,392,401,

411

Asian Monetary Fund, 209
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC), 77,207

Association of South East Asian Nations
(ASEAN), 207, 363,414
asylum seekers, 68,105, 200, 219
AT&amp;T, 92,102

atomic capital, see nanotechnology
Australia, government of 197, 205
Austria, government of 205
Austro-Hungarian Empire, 228
automated teller machine (ATM), 69,
74,109

Baha’ism, 225, 244
balance of power, 124,126
Bank for International Settlements (BIS),
99-100, 209,211,213,223,259,
295, 306, 360, 367-8, 373,401,
406-8,415

banking, 62, 69-70, 74, 76, 82, 86,
95-6,110-13,117,142,161,
167-9,181,199,216,252,294-5,
299,302, 323,329,333,375
Basque country, 203, 228, 233, 238
Belgium, government of, 203, 234
Bhutan, government of, 145
bilateral investment treaties (BITs), 142,
324

biodiversity, 31, 62, 72, 80, 114,117,
189,211,221,241,262,287, 306,
385

biological diversity, see biodiversity
biological weapons, 212, 282


477



478 Index


biotechnology, 4,159-60,162,173-4,
183-4,280,287, 328,389
Black Sea Economic Cooperation, 363
Bolivia, government of, 192
bonds, 62, 70, 96, 111-12,117, 142,
145,166-8,294

bond-rating agencies, 216, 329, 333
books, 67, 271
brain-drain, 105,298
Brazil, government of, 195, 201, 204,
228,238

Bretton Woods, 99,108-9,144, 146,
209,296,333

BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China,
South Africa), 31

Britain, government of, 127, 142, 178,
195,220,231,234,239,331
BSE, 31, 72,288

Buddhism, 41, 58, 71, 87, 244, 260-1,
307, 377,404

bureaucracy/bureaucratism, 28-9, 58,
132-3,150,154,259,275, 353,
370,377,393-5,399,424
Burkina Faso, government of, 192
Burma, government of, 206, 212
business associations, 225, 300, 367,
373, 376, 378

Cable News Network (CNN), 16, 104,
230

Canada, government of, 203-4, 234
canals, 93

capital controls, 16, 38, 40, 56,142,401
capitalism, 2-4, 6, 8, 15-16, 21, 23-5,
28-9, 31-2, 38,42-7, 58, 66-7,
88-90, 99,119,121-2,124,
128-30, 132-7,139-41, 145-7,
151-3,156,159-84,193,208,
226,229-32,245,247-8,257,
259,275,286,297-9, 301-2, 310,
313-15, 319-23, 325, 336-7,
339-40, 345-6, 383-4, 386-8,
390-5, 399,402-3,405-6,
409-10,418,422-4
definition, 137

see also commercial capitalism,
communication capitalism,
concentration of capital, consumer
capitalism, finance capitalism,
industrial capitalism, information
capitalism, late capitalism, post¬
capitalism

care capital, 149,159-60, 162,175-6,
184,302,389


CARE International, 217
Cedel/Clearstream, 112
Central American Parliament, 363
chaebols, 230

chemical weapons, 212, 282, 397
children, 35, 68, 97,108,175-6, 212,
240,245,271, 289-91, 302, 317,
320, 338, 340, 342-4, 346, 356,
379,409

China, government of, 127,139,178,
191,195,205,207,212,232,236,
238,287,373

chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 279
Christianity, 26, 41, 45, 48, 87-8, 97,
215,236,244-5,259-61, 307,
340,377,386

citizenship, 37, 67,134,147,187, 224,
228,237,239,243-4,246,253-5,
309,356,380, 425
civil society, 7,17, 25, 35, 37, 40, 44,

58, 71, 77, 86, 97,106,117,125,
128,150,185,188,214-15,
218-21,225,246,264,285, 334,
339, 344, 348, 351-3, 355, 358-9,
361, 367-71, 373-80, 390, 392-3,
397,408-9,411,414-16,423
definition, 218
see also global civil society
civil wars, 30, 282-3
‘clash of civilizations’ thesis, 26, 245
class, xviii, 5-6,14,17,19,26, 32, 34,
36,40,45-6,48, 65, 73, 79, 82-4,
89,99,101,116,119,124, 126,
128-30,132,135-7,139,147,149,
154,164,184,189,193,198-9,
220, 224-6,228, 239, 241, 252-3,
258,278,305,308, 316, 318-25,
330, 334-5,340, 342, 344-6,351,
354, 371,374-6, 378-80, 387-8,
404-6,409,413,422
definition, 246
see also global class
Clearing House Interbank Payments
System (CHIPS), 110-12
climate change, 31, 62, 72, 75, 90,100,
113-14,119, 191,209,211,219,
221-2,241,262,280-1,287, 372,
381,384,398
Coca-Cola, 73, 94,164-5
Codex Alimentarius Commission,

216

Cold War, 35,102,115, 245, 283
colonialism, 16, 58, 63, 94-5, 98, 132,
142-3,148,151,188,191,227,



Index 479


236,239,246,252,260, 300, 320,
333-4, 345,421
see also decolonization
Columbian exchange, 89
commercial capitalism, 161, 176, 229,
302

commodification, 138-9,153, 161-77,
184,273

definition, 161,229
commodity agreements, 94
commodity exchanges, 93-4,108
commodity markets, 408
Commonwealth, 209, 239
communications capitalism, 159-60,
170-3,176-7,181,184,389
communism, 99,115,149,164, 195,
352-3

communitarianism, 27-9, 244, 253—4,
275,309,394-5,403
community, 79,190, 253
competition policy, see anti-trust policy
competition state, 25
complexity theory, 122
computers, 20, 30, 67, 83, 92, 94,103,
108,118,162,170-2,182-3,189,
199,219,252,263,266-7,271-3,
280,283,286,294-5,297, 309,
311,327, 342,376,402
see also e-commerce, e-mail, Internet,
World Wide Web

concentration of capital, 177,182-4,
388,405,419,422
see also anti-trust policy
Concert of Europe, 242
Confucianism, 26, 58, 261
constructivism, 3,21,121-3,125,
131-2,135-6,154
consumer capitalism, 159-60, 162-5,
173,175,177,181,184,264,

302

consumer movement, 129,164, 218,
289, 304, 325, 334, 374-5,421
consumerism, 4, 24, 26, 80,108,116,
161-4,250,264,286, 305, 381,
399

Continuous Linked Settlements (CLS),
110,112,391,401
corporate alliances, 4, 71,105,160,
178-80

corporate citizenship, see corporate
social responsibility
corporate social responsibility (CSR),
164,215,286,304,310,375,
391-2,398,415


corporatism, 139, 196
cosmocracy, 187
cosmopolitan democracy, 37
cosmopolitanism, 56,187,191, 212,
220, 224, 226, 229, 240-2, 244,
394-5,404,418
Costa Rica, government of, 196
Council of Europe, 207, 236, 363,

414

courts, 7, 75,194, 201, 210, 212, 216,
353, 366-7, 369, 371, 390,400,
412,414-15,422
Creative Commons, 405
credit cards, 64, 69, 74, 76, 95,100,
108-9,183,189, 328
crime, 6, 30, 71-2,105, 189,193, 200,
203-4, 212, 218, 280-1, 284-5,
289,308,311-12,396
criminal networks, 71
Cuba, government of, 145
culture, 6, 16, 19, 28-9, 42, 46, 55,
66,79,83,126,128,130,135,
154, 209, 219, 236-7, 240, 253,
263,265, 280,284, 306, 311,
318,345,349,351,353,364,
371, 376-7, 379-80, 387-90,
393-4, 396, 403-4, 414, 417,
422, 424

effects of globalization on, 14, 18,

26, 32,40, 56-9, 80-1,207,230,
235,245,260, 305-6, 314, 384,
388

see also interculturalism
cyberspace, 68, 77,138, 144, 216, 247,
267, 307, 327, 342
Czechoslovakia government of, 192

dams, 72,114,221,305
data, see statistics

debt, 31, 95-6,137,168-70,219,286,
288-9,292,294,296, 313, 333,
343, 359, 369, 375, 390,400, 404,
416,418,422

decentralization, see devolution
decolonization, 16, 33,139,192,195,
225,231,334
see also colonialism
deep ecology, see ecocentrism
deforestation, 72,114, 221, 235, 286,
364,385,398

de-globalization, 37, 41, 43, 56, 297,
388-9

demergers, 181-2



480 Index


democracy, xv, xvii, xviii, 6-8, 29-30,
35-8,42-4,47, 56-7, 67, 84,124,
129, 147,154, 184, 201, 217-18,
220,223,254,278,309,318,
348-83, 385-90, 392-5,400,
406-7, 410-17, 420-2, 424
definition, 349

Denmark, government of, 194,197
deregulation, 38-40, 56
derivatives, 70, 74,110,112-13,117,
161,165-9,189,216,294,296,
299, 329,364
desertification, 72,115
deterritorialization, 17, 77,110, 187,
225,237,248,268
development cooperation, 204, 218,
243

devolution, 203, 222, 234, 364-5, 389,
410-11,413

diasporas, 5, 77, 81, 92, 148-9,153,
204,226-7,237-9,250,254,283,
285,413

digital divide, 36, 219, 327-8, 330, 386
(dis)abled persons, 7, 35, 79, 116, 130,
175, 189, 220, 226, 239, 251-2,
305, 316-17, 319-20, 340, 342,
344-6, 351,354,378-9,413
disciplines (academic), xiv, xvii, xviii,
27,47,51,62,66,125,262,
269-70,272,274-5,425
diseases, 61, 72, 75, 88-9, 91, 98, 114,
116,145,150,174,200,203,217,
222,242-3,280-1,288, 313, 315,
328,357

domestic work, 68, 73, 105,134, 149,
175-6,237,246, 336-8, 378,409
double movement, 391

EASDAQ, 70

East African Community (EAC), 77,

363

Eastern Orthodoxy, 26, 241, 260
ecocentrism, 41, 154, 256-9, 261-2,
274, 383

ecology, xvii, 6, 29-30, 33, 40, 42-3,
56-7, 60, 62, 64, 67, 71-2, 76-7,
107,116,119,123,128,132-3,
144,150,152,154,174,190,193,
200,204-5,208,210-11,215,
221,241,261-2,265,280-1,283,
285-8,289,296, 304-5, 311-12,
317,319, 342, 349,365,384,
387-90, 392, 394, 396, 398-9,
402,414,418,422,424


see also environmental movements,
global ecology, sustainable
development

education, 57,116,150,163,188, 229,
231, 246, 270-1, 293, 297, 321-4,
335-6, 338-9, 343-4, 351, 353-7,
359, 361, 371, 375, 378, 380, 399,
402-3,406,410-13,416,418,
421-2

efficiency, xvii, 6, 29, 31, 38-42, 266,
294, 303, 307, 313, 319, 343, 349,
371,384,387,394,399
elderly, 68,175, 317, 319, 340, 342,
344, 346, 379, 409
elections, 7, 36, 213, 231-2, 350-3,
361-4, 370-1, 374, 380, 390,
412-13,422

electronic commerce (e-commerce), 17,
68,108,165,177,210
electronic mail (e-mail), 35, 68, 90, 103,
200,251,268

El Salvador, government of, 192
emerging market financial crises, 169
empire, 187

employment/unemployment, 6, 32, 42,
246,248,281, 293-4,296-300,
308, 313, 315, 319, 324, 335-7,
339, 342, 396, 399,402,404,407,
410,414,422
see also labour conditions
‘end of history’ thesis, 32, 275, 388
English language, 14, 26, 48, 50, 73, 80,
246,271-2,274, 305, 327, 361,
375-6

Enlightenment, 32, 89-90,151-2, 260,
265,307,314
environment, see ecology
environmental movements, 30, 97, 113,
129,194, 215,218, 221, 241, 262,
325,334,339,364

epistemology, 27, 258-66, 274, 307-8,
385,394

equality, xv, 6-8, 29, 33-5, 47, 56, 82,
84,87,119,126,128,130,132,
135,154,160,184,195,278,
316-51,371-9,382-3,385,

387-8, 390, 392-5,400,404-11,
421-2,424
definition of, 317
equity, see justice
Eritrea, government of, 192
Esperanto, 73,100-1, 271
ethical investment, 374, 404, 422
Ethiopia, government of, 192



Index 481


euro, xiii, 62, 69,109-10,208, 232, 252
eurobonds, see bonds
Euroclear, 112,167
European Social Charter, 303-4
European Social Forum, 77, 365
European Union (EU), 37, 40, 69, 71,
143,167,181,190,197,203,205,
207-8,231-2,236-7,239,243,
298, 303-4, 332, 338, 352, 363,
366,370,373,403,405
see also Maastricht Treaty
export processing zones (EPZs), 33,

107.117.143.178.297- 8, 336

fascism, 38, 263

facsimile, 64, 67, 92,102-3, 260, 268,
271,323
faith, see religion
family planning, see reproduction
feminism, 3, 33, 99,121-5,133-6, 149,
154, 240,261-3, 309, 345, 378
fibre-optic cables, 102, 119
film, 67, 73, 80,172-3,251,271,273
finance, 4, 6, 61

finance capitalism, 4, 6, 24, 34, 61,
159-61,165-70,173,176-7,181,
184,294,299,302
see also banking, derivatives, foreign
exchange, global finance,
insurance, securities markets
Financial Action Task Force (FATF),
285

Financial Stability Forum (FSF), 295
Financing for Development (FfD), see
United Nations Financing for
Development
fisheries, 72

Flanders, government of, 203
flexibilization, 301-2, 304, 309, 314,
325,336

food, 14, 31, 34, 69, 73, 79, 81, 89,

163,174,216,238,262,265, 273,
288, 324, 337-8, 341-2
Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), 414

food security, 34, 94, 116,150, 241,
291,293,340, 342-3
Fordism, 24, 301, 314
foreign direct investment (FDI), xiii, 16,
19,31,55,61,105-6,117-18,

143.166.183.193.211.297- 8,
323,328

foreign exchange, xiii, 16, 31, 38, 43,
56, 69, 74, 95,109-10,112,117,


139,142,165-8,189,210,220,
266,286,294,299, 332,401, 406,
408

forests, see deforestation
Forest Stewardship Council, 215, 364
foundations, 71, 194, 216, 218, 220,
289,307,370,416
Four Motors, 205-6
France, government of, 127,195, 205,
231

Francophonie, 238-9
Free Papua Organization (OPM), 235
Free Trade Area of the Americas
(FTAA), 207

Fretilin (Revolutionary Front of an
Independent East Timor), 232
Friends of the Earth, 223
fundamentalism, see religious revivalism

Gaia hypothesis, 116, 262
gender, xviii, 3, 5-6, 14, 15,19,26,
33^1,36,43,46,48,73,82-3,99,
101,116,128,130,133-7, 147-9,
154, 184,189, 219-21, 224-6,
239-410,252-4,263,278, 305,
316-20, 334-40, 342, 344-6, 351,
354,371,377-80,387,405,
408-9,413,422
definition, 248
see also patriarchy, women
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT), 99-100,143,145,206,
215,331

Generalized System of Preferences
(GSP), 303,332,408
generation, see age

genetically modified (GM), 31, 69, 72,
173-4,279,286,328
genetic capitalism, see biotechnology
genocide, 212, 243, 281, 398
geography, xiv, 22, 59-60, 63-4, 66-8,
76,78,82,121,131,136,147,

156,225,231,255,258,267-8,
280,308,345, 351,424
see also space

Germany, government of, 194, 205,
228,231

global, see globality, globalization
global accounting, 137-8,153,179, 373
global apartheid, 29, 34, 340
global care chains, 176
global central bank, 43, 223, 386, 401
global citizenship, see citizenship
global city, 76-7,119, 204



482 Index


global civil society, 18, 35, 41-3, 74,
118-19,142,145,149,171,194,
206,218-22,238,246,259,289,
310, 339, 351-2, 369, 374, 376,
379,409,417
see also civil society
global class, 240, 246-8, 254, 393
see also class

global commodity chains, 68
global commons, 211
global communications, xiv, 4, 14, 18,
24,31,33-4,36,41,51,61,67,

69, 71, 73, 77, 81-2, 88, 90-2, 98,
101-4,130,133,139,164-5,186,
202,208-9,216,230, 238,245,
249,258,262,265,268,270, 282,
284,286,289, 327, 330, 336-8,
340-2, 346, 350, 354, 360, 362,
374,389,407

Global Compact, see UN Global
Compact

global companies, 17,18, 33-4, 36, 39,
43, 70, 79, 88-90, 97-8,105,107,
111, 113,117,119,138,140,142,
160,162,168,171-4,176-7,
178-81,183,186,189,193-4,
198-9,203,205-6,209,213,215,

220.230.246.259.284- 5,289,
294,297-8, 300, 302, 309,313-14,
328, 331,341-3, 354, 357,360,
375-6,385, 398-9,403,406,409,
414,419

global competition, 23, 31-2, 183,

196-7,209,288,293, 302-3, 308,
324, 329, 342, 346, 386, 394
global conferences, 51, 68, 73, 98,116,
219,248,251,307,339,357,368,
370,378,411,414
global consciousness, 18, 58, 73-5,
89-90, 99-101,116,118,130,

152,202,208, 256,267, 312, 389,
402,418,423

global corporations, see global companies
global ecology, xiv, 24, 31, 36, 51, 72,
74-5, 77, 87, 90-1,100,113-15,
118,186,189-90,198,202,207,
212,230,235,241,244,257-8,

262.266.270.284- 5,287,

311-12, 354, 356, 362, 364-5,

374, 376-7, 385, 390, 412

see also ecology
global factory, 33, 68

see also export processing zone,
global production


global finance, 14, 24, 31, 33-4, 36, 61,
62, 69-71, 74, 76-7, 86, 89-91,
95-6, 99,110-13,118,134,
139-40,142,146,149,166,
168-9,174,177,186,189, 191,
193, 202, 206, 209, 214, 216, 220,
222-3,238,245-6,257-8,284-6,
292,294-6, 313, 323, 329, 332-3,
336-7, 340-1, 346, 354, 357, 360,
362, 372^1, 381, 385-6, 389, 399,
401,408,414, 422
see also finance

global governance, 18, 30, 33-5, 38,
43-4,71,74,88,98-101,106,

125,128,141-2, 144-5,171, 175,
185-6,188,190-1,198,200,
209-14,218-23,229-30,232,
241,246,248-9,259,285,287,
289,293, 303, 306-7, 310, 312,
320, 325, 333, 339, 343-4, 346,
355-6, 360, 362, 365-6, 368, 372,
378,385,389,396-9,403,
413-15,417-18,420-2
global health, see health
global law, see law
global markets, xiv, 14, 23, 25, 32-4,
40, 51, 64, 69, 74, 91, 93-4,

107-8,125,138,143,153, 161-2,
165,181-3,198,214,230,238,
258,265-6,273,282,288,291,
298, 312, 336, 341-2, 374, 387,
390,402

global mass media, see mass media
global money, 62, 69, 74, 89, 95-6,

100,108-10,119,127,139,160,
189,191,198, 209, 241, 328, 346,
354,374,401-2,408
see also money

global organizations, 31, 34, 61, 70-1,
74, 81, 91, 96-8, 99,105-6,134,
138,171,179, 202,238,241,245,

258,284-5,312,341-2, 346
global production, xiv, 64, 68-9, 74,
91,97,100-1,107,113,118,

125,143,164,177,179,193,
198,216,258,268,300,304,

336, 341,399

global products, 77, 80, 90, 94, 108,
115,118,138-9,143,160-1,
164-5,241,323, 328,340
global public goods, 243^1, 310,
382-43,406

global public policy, 106, 393, 396,
399,409,417-20,422-3



Index 483


Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), 215,
364,367

global socialism, see socialism
global social movements, 26, 34, 45, 58,
320, 325, 339, 344, 346,417
see also social movements
global sourcing, 68, 74,153
global trade regime, 33, 210, 219, 303,
313,331,356,398
see also World Trade Organization
global travel, xiv, 34, 55, 61, 68-9, 88,
92-3,104-5, 116-18,130, 139,
151,202,208,265, 341
see also migration
global village, 73,116, 241
global warming, see climate change
globalism, xvii, 17-18, 47, 49-50, 75-8,
85,208,251,348
globality, 28, 51, 60, 64-5, 67-75,
118-19, 356

globalization, xiii, 355, 395
causation, xvii, 2, 4, 8,15, 20-2,
121-54,424

definition, xv, xvii, 1-3, 8, 15-17,46,
49-84, 424

and social change (general), 2, 4-7,
22-9,149,156-8

history of, xiv, xv, xvii, 2-3, 8, 15, 46,
85-120, 424
indexes, 55, 87, 101
politics of, xviii, 1-2, 45, 50, 67,

82-1

policies towards, 6-8, 14, 37-46, 53,
121-2,125,153-4,196,289, 362,
382,424

scale, xiv, 15, 17-19, 46, 54
terminology, 14, 50-2, 60, 64-5, 141
theory of, xv, xviii, 3,20, 22
unevenness of, 18, 50, 81-2
glocalization, 26, 80
gold standard, 95-6,109
governance, xv, 6-8, 19, 21-2, 24-5,
28-9,35,37,39,42,56,60,66,

76, 90,121-2,131,136,140-9,
152-1,156-7,185-224,226,
228-9,254,256,258,274-5,280,
308, 347-52, 355-62, 364, 366-8,
370-7, 379-81, 383, 385-6, 389,
392, 394-6, 410-11, 414, 416,

420, 422, 424-5
definition of, 140-1, 214
see also global governance
greenhouse effect, see climate change
Greenpeace, 113, 415


Group of Seven/Eight (G7/8), 192, 200,
208,223,289,295, 300, 326, 330,
360, 368, 372-3, 376, 386, 391,
400

Group of 10 (G10), 201, 372
Group of 20 (G20), 201, 223, 372
Group of 24 (G24), 201, 223, 372
Group of 30 (G30), 295
Group of 77 (G77), 201, 249, 382
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), 207,
363

Haiti, government of, 237
harmonization, see standardization
health, xiii, 6,14, 72, 74-5,144, 163,
175,188,195-7,200,202,209,
216,229-30,265,281,288-9,

293,296, 301-3, 312-13, 317,

321, 323-4, 335, 338, 343-4,
354-6, 362, 374, 378, 386, 390,
396,399,406,414,422,425
hedge funds, 112,169,189, 220, 292
hegemony, 121,124, 127,130,133,
135,146,372

heterogenization, 26, 32, 47, 80-1
high modernity, 265-6
Hinduism, 26, 41, 45, 244-5, 259-61,
307

History, 66
HIV, see AIDS

Hollywood, 16, 80,250, 328, 338
homogenization/homogeneity, 26, 47,
50, 57-8, 75, 80-1,235,240,281,
306

homosexuality, see sexuality
Human Development Report, 44, 325,
330,336

humanity, 5, 73, 89, 99, 146,151, 212,
220,226,239-40,246,252,254,
321,418

human rights, 34, 40, 57, 62, 72,116,
125, 144-5,190,193, 200, 204,
208-9, 212, 215, 218-19, 224,

236,240-6, 325, 334, 339, 342-3,
346, 352, 366-7, 381, 396-7,409,
422

human security, see security
humanitarian intervention, 212, 242
humanitarian relief, 6, 31, 97,100,
217-18, 242,244,280,282,289,
310, 342,357,369

hybridity/hybridization, 5-7, 26, 32, 81,
136, 147,149, 156, 224-7, 252-5,
263,273-4,305,315,394



484 Index


hypercapitalism, 4, 7, 24, 29,136,139,
147,160,175,177,184

Iceland, government of, 231
idealism (methodological), 20-1, 47,
121,131-3,146,269
identity, xv, 2, 4-8, 19, 21-2, 25-8, 29,
32,42,44-5, 56, 60, 76, 81,101,
116,121-2,127,130-3,136,140,
145-9,152-4, 156-7, 224-56,

258,274-5,280-1,296, 304-6,
308-9, 314, 318, 383, 385-7, 389,
393-4, 403-4, 413, 417-18, 421,
424

immigration, see migration
imperialism, 16, 26, 32-3, 58-9, 81,
98-9,133-6,139,148,151-2,154,
247,325-6, 334, 384, 394,421
India, government of, 164, 203, 205,
232

indigenous peoples, 26, 45, 56, 73,
79-81, 89,130,133,154,205,

215,233-5,248,253,261,280,
305-7, 310, 331, 344, 364, 376-7
individualism (methodological), see
agent-structure problem
Indonesia, government of, 228, 232,

413

industrial capitalism, 23, 34, 147,

159-61,165,170,173,176,184,
229

inequality, see equality
information age/economy, 14, 23, 35,
162,170,272

information capitalism, 4, 159-60,
170-3,176-7,181,184, 302, 389
Institute of International Finance (IIF),
219, 223

insurance business, 70, 74,110,

112-13,145, 161,166,168,
181-2,200,375

intellectual property, 73,143-4, 175,
200,210,222,331,378,399,
405-6,416,422

interculturalism/interculturality, xiv, 26,
44,253,263,265,273,377,

393-4, 403-4, 421-3
international, 14, 51, 55-6, 61, 65-6,
78-9,82,148,228,234
relationship to global, 2, 356-7
terminology, 15

International Accounting Standards
Board (IASB), 145, 216, 223, 296,
360,367,373,415


International Air Transport Association
(IATA), 216

International Association of Insurance
Supervisors (IAIS), 145, 295
International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), 36,212,282, 397
International Chamber of Commerce
(ICC), 216, 246
International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), 144
International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions (ICFTU), 44,
219-20,247,373
International Council for Local

Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI),
204

International Court of Justice (ICJ), 73,
367

International Criminal Court (ICC), 73,
212,243,397

International Criminal Police

Organization (Interpol), 73, 99,

285

International Federation of Accountants
(IFAC), 145,216,296
International Labour Organization

(ILO), 44, 212,293, 303, 324, 339,
379,391,402-3
International Lesbian and Gay
Association (ILGA), 251
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 18,
33-4, 39, 69, 71, 99-100,109,

111, 141-2, 145,197, 209-11,

213,219,223,230,246,292-3,
295-6, 306, 324, 332-3, 355, 360,
362-3, 365-7, 373, 378, 391, 396,
400-1,408,414-15,420
International Organization for

Standardization (ISO), 99, 144,

216

International Organization of
Employers (IOE), 39
International Organization of Securities
Commissions (IOSCO), 145, 205,
295, 306

International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement, 97
International Securities Market

Association (ISMA), 144, 223, 295
International Telecommunications
Satellite Organization
(INTELSAT), 102

International Telecommunication Union
(ITU), 98,144, 216, 330, 338,406



Index 485


International Union of Local
Authorities, 204

internationalization, 3,16-17,19, 47,
49, 54-6,59, 84-6
Internet, 17, 36, 41, 64, 67-8, 77, 79,
81-2,103,108,117,119,134,

139,142,145,171-2,177,183,
189,191,198,209,219,222,235,
238,247-51,271-2,285, 305-6,
323, 327-8, 332, 337, 354, 358,
360-1, 368, 375, 386, 391,406
Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers (ICANN),
144,216, 360, 366, 368, 375, 415
interregionalism, 207
intra-firm trade, 68,107,118, 179,189
Inuit Circumpolar Conference (ICC),

235, 376

Iran, government of, 194

Irish Republican Army (IRA), 71

Islam, 13, 26, 41, 45, 58, 88, 97,194,

236, 244-5,260-1, 307, 317, 377
Israel, government of, 260

Japan, government of, 127, 148,192,
205,207,209

Judaism, 26, 41, 48, 237-8, 244-5,
260-1, 307, 340, 377
justice, xvii, 14, 29, 33, 36, 42, 57, 67,
83,217,219-20, 316, 345, 374,
391,400, 409,411

Kazakstan, government of, 231
knowledge, 2-6, 8,19, 21-2, 28, 32, 42,
44-7, 60, 67, 80,119, 121-2,125,
130,132-4,136,140,145-6,
149-52,154,156-7,244,256-75,
280-1,306-8,314,318,383,
385-6,389,393-5,403,424
knowledge society, 23
Kyoto Protocol, 212

labour, 38, 68

labour conditions, 32, 42-3, 72, 80,

129,139,212-13,215,219,246,
280-1,284,288,296, 300-4, 308,
311, 314, 318, 339, 344, 387-8,
390, 394, 396,402-3,409,422
see also employment, flexibilization
labour movements, 45, 71, 97, 99-100,
116,129,178,195,215,218-20,
235, 240, 246-8, 300-1, 304,
319-20, 324-5, 346, 352, 358,

364, 367, 373, 375, 378, 386,400,
403-4


land-mines, 282

languages, 80,125,130-1, 148, 188-9,
229,231,234, 238,269, 306, 320,
361,376-7,412
late modernity, 266

law, 72, 74-5, 78-80, 90, 98-9,106,125,
129,134,143-5,150-1,153,175,
189,201-2,209,213,229,234-5,
248,351,370,377,385,405,416
League of Arab States, 206, 236
League of Nations, 99-100
Lebanon, government of, 192, 234
legislatures, see parliaments
legitimacy, 381

liberalism, 3, 7, 35, 38,121-6,128-30,

133- 6,153,263, 348, 350-5, 387
liberalization, 3, 16,19, 25, 38—40, 49,

56-7, 59, 84-6,141-3,146,153,
172,183,196,210,291-2,294,
298-9, 313, 318, 323-4, 329-33,
343,357,382,384,401
literacy, 290-1, 342, 390, 402
literature, 66, 116, 225, 250, 263
local government see substate
governance

localism, 20, 41-2, 47, 58, 78-9,108,
220,262,356,364,410-12,
414-16,418,420

locality/localization, 79, 190, 235, 257,
309,372,384-5,388-9
see also substate governance
London Club, 333
London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR), 70

Long Term Capital Management
(LTCM), 169,279,292,294

Maastricht Treaty, 205, 232, 236, 304
see also European Union
macro-region(alism), see regionalization
Malaysia, government of, 232
maps, 63, 88,100,151, 268
Marrakech Agreement, 210
Marxism, 3, 21, 23, 121-5, 128-30,

134- 7, 154,179,191,344

mass media, 7,26, 34-5, 39, 45, 58, 62,
74,81,94,99,144,164-5,173,
178,181-2,189,193,219,230,
232,235,242,246,250,264,271,
273,279,281, 284-5, 305-6, 311,
328, 330, 338, 341-2, 344, 351-3,
355-9, 361-2, 369, 374, 380, 386,
411,419

see also radio, television



486 Index


materialism (methodological), 21, 47,
121,125,130,133,146,269, 387,
393

McDonald’s, 16, 80, 82, 94,165,198-9
men’s movement, 248
mercenaries, 217
MERCOSUR (Southern Common
Market), 207, 304, 368, 414
mergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A), 160,
172,177,180-4,298-9
methodology, 5, 27, 55, 59, 65-7,121,
157,229,256-7,269-72,274,

318.424

methodological territorialism, 76, 86,
Mexico, government of, 238
micro-credit schemes, 70, 337,408
micro-nations, 5, 76, 199, 226-8,
233-5,239,254,283
Microsoft, 298

migration, 14,19, 34, 38, 40, 55, 64,

68, 70, 74, 89, 92,105,118,127,
134, 145,162,176,191, 200, 208,
230,237-8,251-2,263,280,288,
303, 305, 313, 342, 354, 374, 386,

409.425

militarism, 28, 284

military/militarization, xiii, xiv, 35, 71,
74-5, 77, 98,115,127,130,142,
146,173,190-1,199-200,206,
209,211,217,227,242,249,263,
265,283, 304, 312, 351-2, 360,
379,381,386,396-8,419
millennium bug (Y2K), 279, 311
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), 293,400

missiles, 30, 64, 71, 93, 98, 100, 115,
279,283,397

mobile telephones, see telephone
modernity, xiv, 15-16, 28-9, 47, 58-9,
81,84,86,88,121, 124-6,132,
150-1,154,244,257,260,264-6,
376,421,423

see also high modernity, late
modernity, postmodernity
money, 76, 88,137,191, 232-3, 268
see also global money
money laundering, 30, 211, 285
Mormons, 245

Multilateral Agreement on Investment
(MAI), 142,221,303
multilateralism, xiii, 37, 187, 207, 218,
376,419

multinational corporations, see global
companies


music, 73, 81,116,161, 165,173,183,
225,242,250-1,263,265,273,
328,369

Muslims, see Islam

nanotechnology, 159-60, 162,173-5,
280, 328,389
NASDAQ, 70,172
national identity, see nationhood
nationalism, 18, 20-1, 28, 30, 41-3,
130,134,136,140,147-9, 152-3,
156,189,224-6,228-30,233,
237,239-40,244,245,253,280,
305, 308-10, 315, 334, 381, 393,
421

definition, 225

nationhood, xiv, xviii, 5, 8, 26, 56,
65-6, 73,101,132,147-8,156,
226-7,229,231-9,241,245,
252-4, 255,257,262, 305, 350-1,
354,389,413,424

definition, 227

see also micro-nations, region-nation,
state-nation, transworld nation
neocolonialism, 374
neo-Gramscianism, 129
neoliberalism, 3, 7-8, 37-45, 47, 56-7,
59, 83,120,124-5,141,185,188,
194,197,210,214,217,221, 232,
259,288-90,292,294,296,
299-300, 304, 308, 310, 314-15,
318-21, 323-5, 327, 329-30, 332,
338-9, 342-3, 345-6, 352, 357,
382-93, 395, 399 ,401,417-21,
423

definition, 38
neo-nazism, 370, 379
Netherlands, government of, 197
networks, 23, 45, 63, 71, 77,162, 170,
187, 222

New International Economic Order
(NIEO), 332

‘new medisevalism’ thesis, 187
New Partnership for Africa’s

Development (NEPAD), 293, 330,
400

New World Information and

Communications Order (NWICO),
232, 330

New Zealand, government of, 195
newly industrializing countries (NICs),
31,291,296,298, 303, 313, 327,
341

Nigeria, government of, 234



Index 487


nomads, 234

nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), 35,71,113,170,194,
196,215,218,220-1,248,259,
282, 310, 314, 332, 334, 342, 346,
352, 358, 367, 369, 373, 376, 378,
386,392, 400
see also civil society
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), 249
North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), 235,247, 304
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), 199,207,284, 326, 363
North-South gaps/relations, 33-4,
36,48, 82, 119,137,164,176,
248, 316-17, 319-20, 324-35,
340, 346, 372, 374, 404-5,

407-8, 422

nuclear weapons, xiii, 115, 200, 212,
242,282-3,372,391,397

official development assistance (ODA),
31,208,293, 329-30, 332-3, 346,

381.406.417

offshore arrangements, 4, 62, 70, 76,

95,100,110,112,138,142,160,
177-8,184,189,211, 302, 323-4,
329, 346, 406-7, 422
Ogoni movement, 234
oligopoly, see concentration of capital
Olympic Games, 93,100, 165, 230,

284

ontology, 5, 27, 55, 256-7, 267-9, 274
opinion polls, 361-2
Organization for Security and

Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),

207.282.363
Organization for Economic

Cooperation and Development
(OECD), 39,106,142-44, 146,
192,200,209,211,215,221, 282,
285,295, 304, 306, 324, 326, 331,
333, 360, 367-8, 373,403,405,

407.415.417

Organization of African Unity (OAU),
see African Union

Organization of American States (OAS),

206.363

Organization of the Islamic Conference,
245

Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC), 332
Ottoman Empire, 236
outer-space, 72-3,100,106, 116


Oxfam, 217, 219, 358
ozone depletion, 30, 62, 72, 75, 90, 113,
189,211,241,287,385

Pan-Africanism, 149, 236, 249
Pan-Asianism, 236
Pan-Turkism, 236

parliaments, 7, 43-4, 200, 205, 351,
361-6, 368-71, 380, 393,401,
404,412-15,422
passports, 93, 239
patriarchy, 128, 134-5, 248, 335
see also gender

peace, 6,14, 29, 30, 38, 56, 281^4, 289,
308,312,317, 349,387
peace movements, 97,116,129,
218-19,242,376

peacekeeping operations, 71,115, 212,
280,282,397-8

peasantry, 1, 23, 33—4, 42, 45, 71, 79,
239,246-7, 341, 343-4, 376
peasant movements, 129, 218
see also Via Campesina
personal computer (PC), see computer
Philippines, government of the, 231,

234

pilgrims, 68, 74, 93, 245
plurilateralism, 187
political parties, 45, 218, 230, 351-3,
363,370,412

political realism, 3, 21,121-30,133-6,
145, 345,387

pollution, 262,286,288, 312,406
polycentrism, 4-5, 7,29,136,141, 147,
156,185-7,202,213,217-18,

222,229, 300, 348, 350-1, 354-6,
381, 383, 385, 389, 396-7,413,
420,425

population, 72, 87, 220, 287, 290, 298,
399

Portugal, government of, 238
positivism, 21
postal services, 67, 74, 90
post-capitalism, 23-4,28, 159-60, 173,
183,410

post-colonialism, 21, 132-4
post-Fordism, see flexibilization
post-industrial society, 23,162,170
postmodernism, 3, 5, 14, 21, 28-30, 38,
58,121-5,132-6,154,253,

256-9,262-6,271,273-4, 308,
314, 345,394-5
postmodernity, 47

poststructuralism, see postmodernism



488 Index


poverty, 6, 56,150,174, 218, 281, 284,
289-94,296, 305, 308, 311, 313,
317, 319, 325, 336, 341, 359, 375,
384, 387-8, 392, 396, 399-400,
404-6,408,410
definition of, 290
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers
(PRSPs), 197,368,400
press agencies, 91

private governance, 4, 25, 128, 141-2,
145,185-6,188,214-18,222-3,
295, 304, 348, 354-6, 360, 362,
364-5, 367-8, 370, 372,412-13,

415.423

privatization, 38, 40, 56,143,172, 217,
232,299, 323, 338, 357, 362, 382,
384

production, xv, 4, 8,19, 21-4, 28, 60,
66,76,119,122,127,131,

136-41, 147, 149,152-3,156-84,
224, 226, 254, 256, 258, 274-5,
280, 383, 385-6, 389, 392, 394-5,

406.424

property, 141, 301, 303, 375-6

Quebec, government of, 203-5, 228

race, xviii, 6,14,19, 26, 34, 42, 46, 73,
80, 82-3,97, 99,101,116,119,
126,130,135,137,147-9, 154,
184,189,219-20,224-6,229,

236,239-41,249-50, 253-4,278,
305, 309, 316-20, 340-6, 351,

355, 364, 371, 378-9, 387,405,
409,413,422

racism, 30,133, 212, 249, 341-3,
378-9, 389

radio, 35, 67, 79, 91-2,100-1, 104,
117,165,189,268,273,283,
305-6, 328,341,356, 358-9
radioactive fallout, 72, 75,114
railways, 62, 68, 76, 93, 96,104,107,
172,176,268

rationalism, 4-5, 7, 8,16,21,27-9,38,
45,58, 84, 86,119,122,132-6,

142,146,151-4,156,244,256-9,
261-6,272,274-5,280,307,314,
345,376,383,385,393-5,418,424
definition, 150
realism, see political realism
referenda, see elections
reflexivity, 5, 7, 28-9,136,154, 170,
256,258,264-6,272,274, 307-8,
314,394


reformism (in policy orientation toward
globalization), 3, 7-8, 38, 41-7,
259,278,290,310,383-7,
389-93, 396,400,404,406,411,
416-17,419-21,424
refugees, 68, 74, 105, 200, 209, 222
region-nation, 5, 226-8, 236-7, 239,
254

regionalism/regionalization, 24, 37, 39,
43, 56, 77, 78,82, 95,111,125,
128,141-3,145-6,185-6,188,
190,200,202,204-9,214,222,
224,226,232,235,243,246,251,
282,298, 303, 324, 356, 362-4,
366, 368, 370, 372, 375, 378, 385,
390, 397,403,405,410,412-14,
418,420-1

relationship to globalization, 208-9
regulation, see governance
rejectionism (in policy orientation
towards globalization), 3, 7, 37,
41-3,45,47,230,259-60,278,
290,297,384-6,388-90
religion, xviii, 5, 15, 26, 45, 57, 65, 73,
79-80, 87, 99,101,108,116,128,
130,132,147-9,151,163, 188-9,
191,193,218, 220,224-6,228,
239-40,244-6,257,259-61, 305,
340, 346, 354, 358, 364, 367, 373,
377-8, 387, 389,400,404,413
religious revivalism, 5,18, 27, 30, 41,
43, 81, 97,199,219,230,244-5,
254,256-64,274,283, 305, 307,
309,312,345

reproduction, 134, 175, 220, 248, 336,
344, 378

reterritorialization, 76-7
risk society, 28, 31, 279, 295, 311
rockets, see missiles
Royal Dutch/Shell, 354
rural areas, 14,19, 34-5, 341, 344
see also urban/rural divide
Rushdie affair, 260
Russia, government of, 200, 205, 212,
231

Saami, 205,233, 235
San Marino, government of, 203
SARS, xiii, 31, 72,279,288, 311
satellites, 30, 64, 67, 71, 77, 81, 102-4,
170-1,189,199,232,238,242,
245,250,283,286,306,357
Saudi Arabia, government of, 232
Save the Children, 217



Index 489


schools, see education
science, 32, 80, 132, 150-1, 153,

174, 244, 257-9, 261, 263-6,
307-8

secularism, 150-1,153-4, 258-62, 264,

307- 8,376

securities markets, 31, 70, 74, 96,
110-13,116,142,152,161,

165-9,172,200,266,294,296,
299,323,329,364

security, xv, xvii, xviii, 6-8, 29-32, 47,
56, 84,220,263,278-315, 348,
351, 357, 382-3, 385, 387, 390,
393, 395-404, 406, 410, 421-2,
424

semiconductors, 170, 182
sex trade, 30, 68,175-6, 252, 337-8,
409

sexuality, xviii, 26, 45, 73, 79, 81, 83,
116,126,130,134,147,149,
188-9,220,225-6,239,240, 250,
252,254,280, 316-17, 320, 345,
354,378-9,413

Shack/Slum Dwellers International, 220,
248

shipping, 62, 68, 76, 96,104, 107,142,
177,286, 302,406
Sikhism, 237-8, 244, 307, 377
slave trade, 89, 90, 236
Slovenia, government of, 231
social cohesion, 6, 281, 284, 296, 301,

308- 10, 314, 318, 396, 404,410
see also community

social democracy, 42-4, 46, 383—4,
391^1, 420
see also reformism
social justice, see justice
socialism, 38, 41, 45,139,149,176,
195,259, 300, 322-4, 334, 383,
392-3,395,409

social movements, xiv, 116, 218, 262,
320, 324, 334,378,393
see also global social movements
Society for Worldwide Interbank
Financial Telecommunications
(SWIFT), 110-12
Somalia, government of, 192, 343
South, see North-South relations
South Africa, government of, 194, 201,
205-6,249, 343,374
Southern African Development
Community (SADC), 414
Southern Common Market, see
MERCOSUR


South Korea, government of, 196, 198,
201,207

sovereignty, 18, 24-5,126,188-92,
210,212-13,222,228,233,254,
308, 350-1, 374, 385, 388-9, 390,
420,423

Soviet Union, 148,192, 241
space, 16-17, 59-61, 63-6, 75, 77, 82,
84,118,140,145,147,152,185,
224-5,251,256,258, 265,267-9,
274, 307, 424
see also geography
Spain, government of, 194, 234
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), 69, 95,
109,402,408

special economic zone, see export
processing zones

species extinction, see biodiversity
speed, 268,273

sport, 62, 64, 73,100,103,116,163,
230,232,239,251,273
standardization, 72, 82, 99,125,144,
153,208,232,330

state, xiv, 4-5, 8, 14, 18-19, 21, 24-5,
32, 35-9,42,45, 55-7, 63, 65-68,
77-8, 87,101,105,124,126-30,
132-6,138,141-5, 148,152-4,
177-8,180,185-6, 188-203,
205-7,212-15,217-19,221-2,
224-6,228-9,231-4,239,243,
251,257,262, 301, 305, 310, 312,
314, 320, 323-4, 330, 334, 338,
343, 345-6, 348, 350-4, 356, 360,
362, 365-8, 370-5, 378, 383-4,
386, 389, 392, 396-7, 399,401,
403, 406, 410, 412-16, 419-20,
424-5

see also competition state,

sovereignty, statism, welfare state,
workfare state

state-nation, 5, 224, 226, 228-9, 231-4,
239,252-5,305,308,354
statism, 4-5, 28, 47, 78, 136,139-41,
147,156,185,187-92,202-3,
213-14, 218,222,228-9,234,

237,280, 300, 305, 308, 310, 315,
330, 347, 351, 353-4, 356, 381,
420,425
definition of, 186

statistics, xiv, 20, 86-7, 145, 175, 229,
295,318-9, 321,335, 340
stock markets, see securities markets
strategic alliance, see corporate alliances
stress, 269, 301, 336



490 Index


structural adjustment programmes,
30-1, 33,195,197,199,211,220,
250,270,286,289,293,299, 303,
324,362,400, 404,408
structuralism, (methodological), see
agent-structure problem
subsidiarity, 37, 213, 410-11, 422
substate governance, 4,18, 25, 71,
78-9, 128,140-2,185-6,188,
202-6,208,213,218,222,224,
231,234, 348, 354-5, 360, 364-5,
370,375,384,386,392,396,
410-16, 420

suprastate governance, 4-5, 25, 140-1,
185-6, 202, 205, 213-14, 218,
231,234,282,295, 312, 324, 334,
338-9, 348, 352, 354-6, 360, 362,
365-7, 379, 385-6, 390, 392,
395-400,408-10,412-16,420
supraterritoriality, 3,17,20, 36, 50,
59-62, 64-70, 73, 75-8, 84, 86,
90-1, 95, 97,101,103,105-9,
111-14,116,118,120,144,
147-9,153,156,161,166,170-1,
180,185-7,189-91,198-9,
202-3,219,225-6,229-30, 234,
239-40, 247,251,253,262,
268-9,305,353,401,424
sustainable development, 44, 204,
261-2

Sweden, government of, 194
Switzerland, government of, 205, 362

taxation, 39, 43, 68,137-9,144,

177-9,189,193,195-7,211,285,
287,291, 323-4, 329, 390,401,
406-7,416,421-2

technology, 2,17, 21, 23, 30-1, 35-6,
119,121,124-6,129-30,132-3,
135-7,164,171-2,183,191,208,
258-9,264-6,271-2,274,283,
286, 306, 312, 314, 331, 341-2,
386-7,417, 423

telecommunications, 62, 74, 90, 94,
103,118,125,142,144,170,
172-3,177-8,181-2,193,204,
219,230,272,286,289,330,
341-2,386,402

see also facsimile, Internet, telegraph,
telephone

telegraph, 67, 91, 95,100-1
telephone, 35, 55, 61-2, 67, 70, 79, 82,
86,91-2,100-3,108,112,117,
119,139,162,170-2,189,200,


235,238,242,251-2,260,268,
280,283,302, 327, 341
television, 35-6, 62, 64, 67, 79, 81, 92,
103-4, 108,116-18, 145,165,
170-1,230,232,238,245,250-2,
267-8,271,273, 306, 309, 328,
356-7, 359

territorialism, 8, 60, 63, 65-7, 75-6, 78,
86,91,109,131-40, 147-8,

151-3,176,185-6, 188-9,191-4,
203,208,225,227-8,231,240,
243-4, 251,267-8,280,283,
305-6, 308, 310, 315, 326, 344,
346, 350, 381, 388-9, 391,424-5

see also methodological territorialism
territoriality, 61, 62, 84, 95-6, 225,
229, 233, 237, 239, 254, 257,
263,268,282,300,308,320,
325,348,351,353,366,413,
422,424

(continuing importance of), 3, 50, 64,
76-7,156,192,226
terrorism, 30, 71,115, 199, 280, 284,
311-12,370

think tanks, 39,150, 218, 259, 307,
376,378

Third World, see North-South relations
time, 61-2, 257,267-9, 274, 340
Tobin tax, 44, 401, 406
tourism, 68, 74, 93, 100,104,118, 145,
163-5,205,230,235,251,264,
272,305,364,381
toxic waste, 76, 286
trade, 19, 30-1, 33, 38, 55-7, 61, 72-3,
76, 88-90,107-8,117-18,142-4,
146,171,173,179,182,189,200,
208-9,214,216,221, 230,285-7,
289,291,294, 299, 313, 318, 323,
328-30, 332, 336, 343, 360, 362,
373-4, 377, 392, 399,401-2,408,
414

see also alternative trade schemes,
intra-firm trade

Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS), 144, 331,
391,405

see also intellectual property
trade unions, see labour movement
transfer pricing, 38, 179, 406
transformism (as policy orientation
towards globalization), 3, 7-8, 38,
41,44-7,259,278,290, 383-7,
389-90, 393, 395-6, 402,404,

409, 411, 416-17, 420-1, 424



Index 491


transgovernmental relations, see
transstate relations
translation, 125, 376, 412
transnational corporations, see global
companies

transnational relations, 65
transparency, 35, 40, 295, 349, 359-61,
365, 370, 380, 390, 392,412-13,
416,422

transstate relations, 193,199-202,
222-3,231,233, 354, 356, 360,
368,397,413-14
definition of, 200
transworld nation, see diasporas
traveller’s cheques, 95, 100
Tunisia, government of, 196
Turkey, government of, 239

Uganda, government of, 195, 203
unemployment, see employment
United Nations (UN), 37, 39, 44, 68,

71, 73, 99-100,106,115,144-6,
148,208-9,212-13,219-21,229,
235, 243,246,248,282,287,293,
296, 300, 330, 333, 338-9, 343,
352, 356, 360, 362-3, 367-8, 370,
372-3, 376, 378-9, 391, 397-8,
400,407-9,415

United Nations Centre on Human
Settlements (HABITAT), 205
United Nations Children’s Fund

(UNICEF), 289, 343-4, 379, 391,
400

United Nations Commission on Human
Rights, 212

United Nations Commission for
Sustainable Development, 211,

368

United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD), 291,
333,339

United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM), 339
United Nations Development

Programme (UNDP), 44, 209, 221,
287,290, 333,391,400
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), 71, 73, 330-1, 407
United Nations Environment

Programme (UNEP), 201, 221,
287,372,398

United Nations Financing for
Development, 333, 392


United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), 221
United Nations Fund for Population
Activities (UNFPA), 289
United Nations Global Compact, 215,
304

United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), 217,415
United States of America (USA),

government of, 38, 40, 71, 73, 98,
109,115,127-8,133,135, 142,
145-6,148,152,191,194-5,197,
205-6,210,212,239, 249,283,
286, 331, 343, 365, 372-3,400,
419-20, 423

Universal Postal Union (UPU), 98
universal time coordination (UTC), 99
universalization, 3,16, 49, 57-9, 81,
84-6,281,353

Unrepresented Nations and Peoples
Organization (UNPO), 235,
376-7

urban areas, 19, 30, 34, 58, 60, 76, 164,
204-5,341,346

urban-rural divide, xviii, 6, 14, 48, 82,
119,184,278,316-17,319-20,
340-1, 344-5, 351, 378-9,405,
409,422

Uruguay Round, 247, 291, 331, 346,
362, 365

see also Marrakech Agreement
US dollar, 62, 69, 76, 95, 111, 402

value added tax (VAT), 324
Vanuatu, government of, 373
Via Campesina, 45, 71, 247, 344
video conference, 67,102
Vietnam, government of, 195, 232

Wallonia, government of, 203
war, 6, 30, 71, 126,134, 148, 150,180,
193,198-9,201,217,222,
229-30, 242,280-5, 311-12, 344,
351,374,381,384,388,425
see also world wars
Washington Consensus, xiii, 38, 40,
146,383,386-7,392,418
websites, see World Wide Web
welfare state, 25, 33, 38,194-8, 222,
300,393

western/westernization, 3, 16, 25, 49,
58-9, 81, 84-6, 88,154,244-5,
306, 309, 353, 364, 376-7,421,
423



492 Index


Western European Union (WEU), 363
Westphalian system, 25, 188-93,

198-9, 201-3,213,222, 350-1,
389,420,423

women, 7, 30, 33-4, 42, 45, 80, 82, 97,
99,108,119, 128,130,133,136,
149,175,196,239,262, 302-3,
305, 310, 317, 319, 334-9, 344,
346, 354, 359, 377-8, 390,408-9,
413,422

women’s movements, 129, 218-19, 221,
230,240,248, 254, 325, 339, 346
work, see employment
workfare state, 25
working conditions, see labour
conditions

world (concept of ), 64, 257
World Bank, 18, 31, 33-5, 39, 70,
99-100,110-11,141,197,205,
209, 211, 213, 219-21, 246, 286,
290,292-3,296, 306, 318, 321,
331, 339, 355, 360, 362, 365, 367,
373,376,391,400,408,411,
414-15

World Confederation of Labour (WCL),
247

World Conservation Union (IUCN),

221

World Economic Forum (WEF), 14, 39,
220,246-7, 325,391
world fairs, 92-3, 100, 232
World Federation of Stock Exchanges,
216

World Gender Organization, 339
World Health Organization (WHO),

72,145,190, 215, 217, 289, 343,
363

World Intellectual Property

Organization (WIPO), 144, 406
world literature, 116


World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), 221

World Organization of United Cities
and Local Governments, 204
world music, 116
world records, 116

World Resources Institute (WRI), 221
world services, 92,104
World Social Forum (WSF), 14, 44, 219,
357,365,369,418,421
world society theory, 64,125
world-system theory, 19,129, 270, 345
World Tourism Organization (WTO),
216

World Trade Organization (WTO), xiii,

1,18,36,71,106,143—4,146,172,
206,208-11,213,215,219,221,
247,288-9,295,298,300,303,

324,330-1,333,343,346,360,

363,365-8,373,375,377,386,

392, 396, 399,402-3,405,408,414
see also Marrakech Agreement,
Uruguay Round

World Vision International, 217
world wars, 90-1, 94, 96, 98, 115,148,
195,212,236,247

World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF),
113,221,241,373

World Wide Web, 171, 230, 238, 245,
271,356,358,360,411-12

youth, 45,116,149,164,218,237,
239-40,250,254,305,342,

345-6, 379

Yugoslavia government of, 192

Zapatistas, 45, 235
Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the
South Atlantic, 207
Zoroastrianism, 87
